        OVERVIEW OF CYBER LAWS IN INDIA
Index

1. Introduction

  1.1.     History of Internet and World Wide Web

  1.2.     Need for cyber law

  1.3.     Cyber crime on the rise

  1.4.     Important terms related to cyber law

2. Cyber law in India

  2.1.     Need for cyber law in India

  2.2.     History of cyber law in India

  2.3.     Information Technology Act, 2000

  2.4.     Overview of other laws amended by the IT Act, 2000

  2.5.     National Policy on Information Technology 2012

3. Overview of the Information Technology Act, 2000

4. Overview of Rules issued under the IT Act, 2000

5. Electronic commerce

6. Electronic contracts

7. Cyber crimes / Cyber Frauds

  7.1.     Definition of cyber crime

  7.2.     First Cyber crime

  7.3.     Types of cyber frauds

  7.4.     Cyber frauds in India
                                                                       1




                                                                www.taxguru.in
  7.5.     Preventive measures

  7.6.     Cyber crimes

  7.7.     Who commits cyber crimes?

  7.8.     Penalties and offences under the IT Act, 2000

  7.9.     Offences under other legislations

  7.10.    Investigation of cyber crimes in India

8. Regulatory Authorities

9. Cloud computing

10.   Case laws

11.   Important websites & Addresses




                                                           2
   1. INTRODUCTION

"Cyber" is a prefix used to describe a person, thing, or idea as part of the
computer and information age. Taken from kybernetes, Greek word for
"steersman" or "governor," it was first used in cybernetics, a word coined by
Norbert Wiener and his colleagues. The virtual world of internet is known as
cyberspace and the laws governing this area are known as Cyber laws and all
the netizens of this space come under the ambit of these laws as it carries a
kind of universal jurisdiction. Cyber law can also be described as that branch
of law that deals with legal issues related to use of inter-networked information
technology. In short, cyber law is the law governing computers and the
internet.

The growth of Electronic Commerce has propelled the need for vibrant and
effective regulatory mechanisms which would further strengthen the legal
infrastructure, so crucial to the success of Electronic Commerce. All these
regulatory mechanisms and legal infrastructures come within the domain of
Cyber law.

Cyber law is important because it touches almost all aspects of transactions
and activities on and involving the internet, World Wide Web and cyberspace.
Every action and reaction in cyberspace has some legal and cyber legal
perspectives.

Cyber law encompasses laws relating to –

      Cyber crimes

      Electronic and digital signatures

      Intellectual property

      Data protection and privacy

                                                                                3




                                                                       www.taxguru.in
   1.1.     History of Internet and World Wide Web

The Internet is a global system of interconnected computer networks that use
the standardized Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP). It is a network of networks
that consists of millions of private and public, academic, business, and
government networks of local to global scope that are linked by copper wires,
fiber-optic cables, wireless connections, and other technologies. The Internet
carries a vast array of information resources and services, most notably the
inter-linked hypertext documents of the World Wide Web (WWW) and the
infrastructure to support electronic mail, in addition to popular services such
as online chat, file transfer and file sharing, online gaming, and Voice over
Internet Protocol (VoIP) person-to-person communication via voice and video.
The origins of the Internet dates back to the 1960s when the United States
funded research projects of its military agencies to build robust, fault-tolerant
and distributed computer networks. This research and a period of civilian
funding of a new U.S. backbone by the National Science Foundation spawned
worldwide participation in the development of new networking technologies and
led to the commercialization of an international network in the mid 1990s, and
resulted in the following popularization of countless applications in virtually
every aspect of modern human life.


The terms Internet and World Wide Web are often used in everyday speech
without much distinction. However, the Internet and the World Wide Web are
not one and the same. The Internet is a global data communications system. It
is a hardware and software infrastructure that provides connectivity between
computers. In contrast, the Web is one of the services communicated via the
Internet. It is a collection of interconnected documents and other resources,
linked by hyperlinks and Uniform Resource Locator [URLs].


                                                                                4
The World Wide Web was invented in 1989 by the English physicist Tim
Berners-Lee, now the Director of the World Wide Web Consortium, and later
assisted by Robert Cailliau, a Belgian computer scientist, while both were
working at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. In 1990, they proposed building a
"web of nodes" storing "hypertext pages" viewed by "browsers" on a network
and released that web in December.


Overall Internet usage has seen tremendous growth. From 2000 to 2009, the
number of Internet users globally rose from 394 million to 1.858 billion. By
2010, 22 percent of the world's population had access to computers with 1
billion Google searches every day, 300 million Internet users reading blogs, and
2 billion videos viewed daily on YouTube.


After English (27%), the most requested languages on the World Wide Web are
Chinese (23%), Spanish (8%), Japanese (5%), Portuguese and German (4%
each), Arabic, French and Russian (3% each), and Korean (2%). By region, 42%
of the world's Internet users are based in Asia, 24% in Europe, 14% in North
America, 10% in Latin America and the Caribbean taken together, 6% in Africa,
3% in the Middle East and 1% in Australia/Oceania.



   1.2.     Need for Cyber law

In today’s techno-savvy environment, the world is becoming more and more
digitally sophisticated and so are the crimes. Internet was initially developed as
a research and information sharing tool and was in an unregulated manner. As
the time passed by it became more transactional with e-business, e-commerce,
e-governance and e-procurement etc. All legal issues related to internet crime
are dealt with through cyber laws. As the number of internet users is on the
rise, the need for cyber laws and their application has also gathered great
momentum.
                                                                                 5




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
In today's highly digitalized world, almost everyone is affected by cyber law. For
example:


      Almost all transactions in shares are in demat form.
      Almost all companies extensively depend upon their computer networks
       and keep their valuable data in electronic form.
      Government forms including income tax returns, company law forms etc.
       are now filled in electronic form.
      Consumers are increasingly using credit cards for shopping.
      Most people are using email, cell phones and SMS messages for
       communication.
      Even in "non-cyber crime" cases, important evidence is found in
       computers / cell phones e.g. in cases of divorce, murder, kidnapping, tax
       evasion, organized crime, terrorist operations, counterfeit currency etc.
      Cyber crime cases such as online banking frauds, online share trading
       fraud, source code theft, credit card fraud, tax evasion, virus attacks,
       cyber sabotage, phishing attacks, email hijacking, denial of service,
       hacking, pornography etc are becoming common.
      Digital signatures and e-contracts are fast replacing conventional
       methods of transacting business.

Technology per se is never a disputed issue but for whom and at what cost has
been the issue in the ambit of governance. The cyber revolution holds the
promise of quickly reaching the masses as opposed to the earlier technologies,
which had a trickledown effect. Such a promise and potential can only be
realized with an appropriate legal regime based on a given socio-economic
matrix.




                                                                                   6
1.3.         Cyber crime on the rise

   As per the cyber crime data maintained by the National Crime Records
    Bureau (NCRB), a total of 217, 288, 420 and 966 Cyber Crime cases were
    registered under the Information Technology Act, 2000 during 2007,
    2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively. Also, a total of 328, 176, 276 and 356
    cases were registered under Cyber Crime related Sections of Indian Penal
    Code (IPC) during 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively. A total of
    154, 178, 288 and 799 persons were arrested under Information
    Technology Act 2000 during 2007-2010. A total number of 429, 195,
    263 and 294 persons were arrested under Cyber Crime related Sections
    of Indian Penal Code (IPC) during 2007-2010.

   As per 2011 NCRB figures, there were 1,791 cases registered under the
    IT Act during the year 2011 as compared to 966 cases during the
    previous year (2010) thereby reporting an increase of 85.4% in 2011 over
    2010.

   Of this, 19.5% cases (349 out of 1,791 cases) were reported from Andhra
    Pradesh followed by Maharashtra (306), Kerala (227), Karnataka (151)
    and Rajasthan (122). And 46.1% (826 cases) of the total 1,791 cases
    registered under IT Act, 2000 were related to loss/damage to computer
    resource/utility reported under hacking with computer systems.

   According to NCRB, the police have recorded less than 5,000—only 4,829
    cases and made fewer arrests (3,187) between 2007 and 2011, under
    both the Information Technology (IT) Act as well as the Indian Penal Code
    (IPC).

   And convictions remain in single digits, according to lawyers. Only 487
    persons were arrested for committing such offences during the year



                                                                            7




                                                                   www.taxguru.in
    2011. There were 496 cases of obscene publications/transmission in
    electronic form during the year 2011 wherein 443 persons were arrested.

   Out of total 157 cases relating to hacking under Sec. 66(2), most of the
    cases (23 cases) were reported from Karnataka followed by Kerala (22 )
    and Andhra Pradesh (20 cases). And 20.4% of the 1184 persons arrested
    in cases relating to IT Act, 2000 were from Andhra Pradesh (242) followed
    by Maharashtra (226).

   The age-wise profile of persons arrested in cyber crime cases under the
    IT Act, 2000 showed that 58.6% of the offenders were in the age group
    18–30 years (695 out of 1184) and 31.7% of the offenders were in the age
    group 30-45 years (376 out of 1184). Madhya Pradesh (10), Maharashtra
    (4), Kerala (3) and Delhi (2) reported offenders whose age was below 18
    years.

   Meanwhile, a total of 422 cases were registered under the Indian Penal
    Code or IPC Sections during the year 2011 as compared to 356 such
    cases during 2010 thereby reporting an increase of 18.5%. Maharashtra
    reported maximum number of such cases (87 out of 422 cases i.e.
    20.6%) followed by Chhattisgarh 18.0% (76 cases) and Delhi 11.6% (49
    Cases).

   Majority of the crimes out of total 422 cases registered under IPC fall
    under 2 categories--forgery (259) and Criminal Breach of Trust or fraud
    (118). Although such offences fall under the traditional IPC crimes, these
    cases had the cyber overtones wherein computer, Internet or its enabled
    services were present in the crime and hence they were categorised as
    Cyber Crimes under IPC.

   Crime head-wise and age-wise profile of the offenders arrested under
    Cyber Crimes (IPC) for the year 2011 reveals that offenders involved in

                                                                             8
       forgery cases were more in the age-group of 18-30 (46.5%) (129 out of
       277). 50.4% of the persons arrested under Criminal Breach of
       Trust/Cyber Fraud offences were in the age group 30-45 years (65 out of
       129).

      Meanwhile 9 out of 88 mega cities did not report any case of cyber crime
       i.e., neither under the IT Act nor under IPC Sections during the year
       2011.

      And 53 mega cities have reported 858 cases under IT Act and 200 cases
       under various sections of IPC. There was an increase of 147.3% (from
       347 cases in 2009 to 858 cases in 2011) in cases under IT Act as
       compared to previous year (2010), and an increase of 33.3% (from 150
       cases in 2010 to 200 cases in 2011) of cases registered under various
       sections of IPC.

      Bangalore   (117),   Vishakhapatnam     (107),   Pune   (83),   Jaipur   (76),
       Hyderabad (67) and Delhi (City) (50) have reported high incidence of
       cases (500 out of 858 cases) registered under IT Act, accounting for more
       than half of the cases (58.3%) reported under the IT Act. Delhi City has
       reported the highest incidence (49 out of 200) of cases reported under
       IPC sections accounting for 24.5% followed by Mumbai (25 or 12.5%).

A major programme has been initiated on development of cyber forensics
specifically cyber forensic tools, setting up of infrastructure for investigation
and training of the users, particularly police and judicial officers in use of this
tool to collect and analyze the digital evidence and present them in Court.
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) and Centre for
Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC) are involved in providing basic
and advanced training of Law Enforcement Agencies, Forensic labs and
judiciary on the procedures and methodology of collecting, analyzing and
presenting digital evidence.
                                                                                   9




                                                                          www.taxguru.in
Cyber forensic training lab has been set up at Training Academy of Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to impart basic and advanced training in Cyber
Forensics and Investigation of Cyber Crimes to Police Officers associated with
CBI. In addition, Government has set up cyber forensic training and
investigation labs in Kerala, Assam, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh,
Tripura, Meghalaya, Manipur and Jammu & Kashmir.

In collaboration with Data Security Council of India (DSCI), NASSCOM, Cyber
Forensic Labs have been set up at Mumbai, Bengaluru, Pune and Kolkata.
DSCI has organized 112 training programmes on Cyber Crime Investigation
and awareness and a total of 3680 Police officials, judiciary and Public
prosecutors have been trained through these programmes.

Indian    Computer    Emergency    Response   Team   (CERT-In)   issues   alerts,
advisories and guidelines regarding cyber security threats and measures to be
taken to prevent cyber incidents and enhance security of Information
Technology systems.




   1.4.     Important terms related to cyber law

"Access" with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means
gaining entry into, instructing or communicating with the logical, arithmetical,
or memory function resources of a computer, computer system or computer
network. (Sec.2(1)(a) of IT Act, 2000)


"Addressee" means a person who is intended by the originator to receive the
electronic record but does not include any intermediary. (Sec.2(1)(b) of IT Act,
2000)




                                                                              10
"Affixing Electronic Signature" with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions means adoption of any methodology or procedure by a person for
the purpose of authenticating an electronic record by means of Electronic
Signature. (Sec.2(1)(d) of IT Act, 2000)


"Asymmetric Crypto System" means a system of a secure key pair consisting
of a private key for creating a digital signature and a public key to verify the
digital signature. (Sec.2(1)(f) of IT Act, 2000)
"Certifying Authority" means a person who has been granted a license to
issue a Electronic Signature Certificate under section 24. (Sec.2(1)(g) of IT Act,
2000)


"Communication Device" means Cell Phones, Personal Digital Assistance
(Sic), or combination of both or any other device used to communicate, send or
transmit any text, video, audio, or image. (Sec.2(1)(ha) of IT Act, 2000)


"Computer" means any electronic, magnetic, optical or other high-speed data
processing device or system which performs logical, arithmetic, and memory
functions by manipulations of electronic, magnetic or optical impulses, and
includes all input, output, processing, storage, computer software, or
communication facilities which are connected or related to the computer in a
computer system or computer network (Sec.2(1)(i) of IT Act, 2000)


"Computer Network" means the interconnection of one or more Computers or
Computer systems or Communication device through-
(i) the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line, wire, wireless or other
communication media; and
(ii) terminals or a complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers
or communication device whether or not the interconnection is continuously
maintained. (Sec.2(1)(j) of IT Act, 2000)
                                                                                  11




                                                                            www.taxguru.in
"Computer Resource" means computer, communication device, computer
system, computer network, data, computer database or software. (Sec.2(1)(k) of
IT Act, 2000)


"Computer System" means a device or collection of devices, including input
and output support devices and excluding calculators which are not
programmable and capable of being used in conjunction with external files,
which contain computer programmes, electronic instructions, input data, and
output data, that performs logic, arithmetic, data storage and retrieval,
communication control and other functions. (Sec.2(1)(l) of IT Act, 2000)


"Cyber cafe" means any facility from where access to the Internet is offered by
any person in the ordinary course of business to the members of the public.
(Sec.2(1)(na) of IT Act, 2000)


"Cyber Security" means protecting information, equipment, devices, computer,
computer resource, communication device and information stored therein from
unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification or destruction.
(Sec.2(1)(nb) of IT Act, 2000)


(o) "Data" means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions which are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalized
manner, and is intended to be processed, is being processed or has been
processed in a computer system or computer network and may be in any form
(including computer printouts magnetic or optical storage media, punched
cards, punched tapes) or stored internally in the memory of the computer.
(Sec.2(1)(o) of IT Act, 2000)




                                                                             12
(p) "Digital Signature" means authentication of any electronic record by a
subscriber by means of an electronic method or procedure in accordance with
the provisions of section 3. (Sec.2(1)(p) of IT Act, 2000)


"Electronic Form" with reference to information means any information
generated, sent, received or stored in media, magnetic, optical, computer
memory, micro film, computer generated micro fiche or similar device.
(Sec.2(1)(r) of IT Act, 2000)


"Electronic Record" means data, record or data generated, image or sound
stored, received or sent in an electronic form or micro film or computer
generated micro fiche. (Sec.2(1)(t) of IT Act, 2000)


"Electronic signature" means authentication of any electronic record by a
subscriber by means of the electronic technique specified in the second
schedule and includes digital signature. (Sec.2(1)(ta) of IT Act, 2000)


"Function", in relation to a computer, includes logic, control, arithmetical
process,    deletion,    storage   and     retrieval   and   communication      or
telecommunication from or within a computer. (Sec.2(1)(u) of IT Act, 2000)


"Information" includes data, message, text, images, sound, voice, codes,
computer programmes, software and databases or micro film or computer
generated micro fiche. (Sec.2(1)(v) of IT Act, 2000)


"Intermediary" with respect to any particular electronic records, means any
person who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that
record or provides any service with respect to that record and includes telecom
service providers, network service providers, internet service providers, web


                                                                                13




                                                                          www.taxguru.in
hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-auction
sites, online market places and cyber cafes. (Sec.2(1)(w) of IT Act, 2000)


"Key Pair", in an asymmetric crypto system, means a private key and its
mathematically related public key, which are so related that the public key can
verify a digital signature created by the private key. (Sec.2(1)(x) of IT Act, 2000)


"Originator" means a person who sends, generates, stores or transmits any
electronic message or causes any electronic message to be sent, generated,
stored or transmitted to any other person but does not include an
intermediary. (Sec.2(1)(za) of IT Act, 2000)


"Private Key" means the key of a key pair used to create a digital signature.
(Sec.2(1)(zc) of IT Act, 2000)


"Public Key" means the key of a key pair used to verify a digital signature and
listed in the Digital Signature Certificate. (Sec.2(1)(zd) of IT Act, 2000)


"Secure System" means computer hardware, software, and procedure that -:
(a) are reasonably secure from unauthorized access and misuse;
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;
(c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions; and
(d) adhere to generally accepted security procedures. (Sec.2(1)(ze) of IT Act,
2000)


"Subscriber" means a person in whose name the Electronic Signature
Certificate is issued. (Sec.2(1)(zg) of IT Act, 2000)




                                                                                   14
   2. CYBER LAW IN INDIA

In India, cyber laws are contained in the Information Technology Act, 2000 ("IT
Act") which came into force on October 17, 2000. The main purpose of the Act
is to provide legal recognition to electronic commerce and to facilitate filing of
electronic records with the Government.

The following Act, Rules and Regulations are covered under cyber laws:

   1. Information Technology Act, 2000
   2. Information Technology (Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000
   3. Information Technology (Security Procedure) Rules, 2004
   4. Information Technology (Certifying Authority) Regulations, 2001

   2.1.     Need for cyber law in India

Firstly, India has an extremely detailed and well-defined legal system in place.
Numerous laws have been enacted and implemented and the foremost amongst
them is The Constitution of India. We have inter alia, amongst others, the
Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence Act 1872, the Banker's Book Evidence
Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Companies Act, and so
on. However the arrival of Internet signalled the beginning of the rise of new
and complex legal issues. It may be pertinent to mention that all the existing
laws in place in India were enacted way back keeping in mind the relevant
political, social, economic, and cultural scenario of that relevant time. Nobody
then could really visualize about the Internet. Despite the brilliant acumen of
our master draftsmen, the requirements of cyberspace could hardly ever be
anticipated. As such, the coming of the Internet led to the emergence of
numerous ticklish legal issues and problems which necessitated the enactment
of Cyber laws.

                                                                                15




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
Secondly, the existing laws of India, even with the most benevolent and liberal
interpretation, could not be interpreted in the light of the emerging cyberspace,
to include all aspects relating to different activities in cyberspace. In fact, the
practical experience and the wisdom of judgment found that it shall not be
without major perils and pitfalls, if the existing laws were to be interpreted in
the scenario of emerging cyberspace, without enacting new cyber laws. Hence,
the need for enactment of relevant cyber laws.

Thirdly, none of the existing laws gave any legal validity or sanction to the
activities in Cyberspace. For example, the Net is used by a large majority of
users for email. Yet till today, email is not "legal" in our country. There is no
law in the country, which gives legal validity, and sanction to email. Courts and
judiciary in our country have been reluctant to grant judicial recognition to the
legality of email in the absence of any specific law having been enacted by the
Parliament. As such the need has arisen for Cyber law.

Fourthly, Internet requires an enabling and supportive legal infrastructure in
tune with the times. This legal infrastructure can only be given by the
enactment of the relevant Cyber laws as the traditional laws have failed to
grant the same. E-commerce, the biggest future of Internet, can only be
possible if necessary legal infrastructure compliments the same to enable its
vibrant growth.

All these and other varied considerations created a conducive atmosphere for
the need for enacting relevant cyber laws in India.

   2.2.     History of cyber law in India

The information Technology Act is an outcome of the resolution dated 30th
January 1997 of the General Assembly of the United Nations, which adopted
the Model Law on Electronic Commerce, adopted the Model Law on Electronic

                                                                                 16
Commerce on International Trade Law. This resolution recommended, inter
alia, that all states give favourable consideration to the said Model Law while
revising enacting new law, so that uniformity may be observed in the laws, of
the various cyber-nations, applicable to alternatives to paper based methods of
communication and storage of information.

The Department of Electronics (DoE) in July 1998 drafted the bill. However, it
could only be introduced in the House on December 16, 1999 (after a gap of
almost one and a half years) when the new IT Ministry was formed. It
underwent substantial alteration, with the Commerce Ministry making
suggestions related to e-commerce and matters pertaining to World Trade
Organization (WTO) obligations. The Ministry of Law and Company Affairs then
vetted this joint draft.

After its introduction in the House, the bill was referred to the 42-member
Parliamentary Standing Committee following demands from the Members. The
Standing Committee made several suggestions to be incorporated into the bill.
However, only those suggestions that were approved by the Ministry of
Information Technology were incorporated. One of the suggestions that was
highly debated upon was that a cyber café owner must maintain a register to
record the names and addresses of all people visiting his café and also a list of
the websites that they surfed. This suggestion was made as an attempt to curb
cyber crime and to facilitate speedy locating of a cyber criminal. However, at
the same time it was ridiculed, as it would invade upon a net surfer’s privacy
and would not be economically viable. Finally, this suggestion was dropped by
the IT Ministry in its final draft.

The Union Cabinet approved the bill on May 13, 2000 and on May 17, 2000,
both the houses of the Indian Parliament passed the Information Technology
Bill. The Bill received the assent of the President on 9th June 2000 and came to


                                                                               17




                                                                       www.taxguru.in
be known as the Information Technology Act, 2000. The Act came into force on
17th October 2000.

With the passage of time, as technology developed further and new methods of
committing crime using Internet & computers surfaced, the need was felt to
amend the IT Act, 2000 to insert new kinds of cyber offences and plug in other
loopholes that posed hurdles in the effective enforcement of the IT Act, 2000.

This led to the passage of the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008
which was made effective from 27 October 2009. The IT (Amendment) Act,
2008 has brought marked changes in the IT Act, 2000 on several counts.

   2.3.     Information Technology Act, 2000

Information Technology Act, 2000 is India’s mother legislation regulating the
use of computers, computer systems and computer networks as also data and
information in the electronic format. This legislation has touched varied
aspects pertaining to electronic authentication, digital (electronic) signatures,
cyber crimes and liability of network service providers.

The Preamble to the Act states that it aims at providing legal recognition for
transactions carried out by means of electronic data interchange and other
means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as "electronic
commerce", which involve the use of alternatives to paper-based methods of
communication and storage of information and aims at facilitating electronic
filing of documents with the Government agencies.

This Act was amended by Information Technology Amendment Bill, 2008 which
was passed in Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2008 and in Rajya Sabha on 23rd
December, 2008. It received the assent of the President on 5th February 2009
and was notified with effect from 27/10/2009.


                                                                                 18
The IT Act of 2000 was developed to promote the IT industry, regulate e-
commerce, facilitate e-governance and prevent cybercrime. The Act also sought
to foster security practices within India that would serve the country in a global
context. The Amendment was created to address issues that the original bill
failed to cover and to accommodate further development of IT and related
security concerns since the original law was passed.

The IT Act, 2000 consists of 90 sections spread over 13 chapters [Sections 91,
92, 93 and 94 of the principal Act were omitted by the Information Technology
(Amendment) Act 2008 and has 2 schedules.[ Schedules III and IV were
omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act 2008].


Salient features of the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008

        i.   The term 'digital signature' has been replaced with 'electronic
             signature' to make the Act more technology neutral.

       ii.   A new section has been inserted to define 'communication device'
             to mean cell phones, personal digital assistance or combination of
             both or any other device used to communicate, send or transmit
             any text video, audio or image.

      iii.   A new section has been added to define cyber cafe as any facility
             from where the access to the internet is offered by any person in
             the ordinary course of business to the members of the public.

       iv.   A new definition has been inserted for intermediary.

       v.    A new section 10A has been inserted to the effect that contracts
             concluded electronically shall not be deemed to be unenforceable
             solely on the ground that electronic form or means was used.



                                                                                19




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
 vi.    The damages of Rs. One Crore prescribed under section 43 of the
        earlier Act of 2000 for damage to computer, computer system etc.
        has been deleted and the relevant parts of the section have been
        substituted by the words, 'he shall be liable to pay damages by way
        of compensation to the person so affected'.

vii.    A new section 43A has been inserted to protect sensitive personal
        data or information possessed, dealt or handled by a body
        corporate in a computer resource which such body corporate owns,
        controls or operates. If such body corporate is negligent in
        implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and
        procedures and thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to
        any person, it shall be liable to pay damages by way of
        compensation to the person so affected.

viii.   Sections 66A to 66F has been added to Section 66 prescribing
        punishment for offences such as obscene electronic message
        transmissions, identity theft, cheating by impersonation using
        computer resource, violation of privacy and cyber terrorism.

 ix.    Section 67 of the IT Act, 2000 has been amended to reduce the
        term of imprisonment for publishing or transmitting obscene
        material in electronic form to three years from five years and
        increase the fine thereof from Rs.100,000 to Rs. 500,000. Sections
        67A to 67C have also been inserted. While Sections 67A and B
        deals with penal provisions in respect of offences of publishing or
        transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act and child
        pornography in electronic form, Section 67C deals with the
        obligation of an intermediary to preserve and retain such
        information as may be specified for such duration and in such
        manner and format as the central government may prescribe.

                                                                         20
x.    In view of the increasing threat of terrorism in the country, the new
      amendments include an amended section 69 giving power to the
      state to issue directions for interception or monitoring of
      decryption of any information through any computer resource.
      Further, sections 69A and B, two new sections, grant power to the
      state to issue directions for blocking for public access of any
      information through any computer resource and to authorize to
      monitor and collect traffic data or information through any
      computer resource for cyber security.

xi.   Section 79 of the Act which exempted intermediaries has been
      modified to the effect that an intermediary shall not be liable for
      any third party information data or communication link made
      available or hosted by him if; (a) The function of the intermediary is
      limited to providing access to a communication system over which
      information made available by third parties is transmitted or
      temporarily stored or hosted; (b) The intermediary does not initiate
      the transmission or select the receiver of the transmission and
      select or modify the information contained in the transmission; (c)
      The intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his
      duties. However, section 79 will not apply to an intermediary if the
      intermediary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced whether
      by threats or promise or otherwise in the commission of the
      unlawful act or upon receiving actual knowledge or on being
      notified that any information, data or communication link residing
      in or connected to a computer resource controlled by it is being
      used to commit an unlawful act, the intermediary fails to
      expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that
      resource without vitiating the evidence in any manner.



                                                                          21




                                                                  www.taxguru.in
     xii.   A proviso has been added to Section 81 which states that the
            provisions of the Act shall have overriding effect. The proviso states
            that nothing contained in the Act shall restrict any person from
            exercising any right conferred under the Copyright Act, 1957.

Rules notified under the Information Technology Act, 2000

  a) The    Information   Technology    (Reasonable    security     practices     and
     procedures and sensitive personal data or information) Rules, 2011

  b) The Information Technology (Electronic Service Delivery) Rules, 2011

  c) The Information Technology (Intermediaries guidelines) Rules, 2011

  d) The Information Technology (Guidelines for Cyber Cafe) Rules, 2011

  e) The Cyber Appellate Tribunal (Salary, Allowances and other terms and
     conditions of service of Chairperson and Members) Rules, 2009

  f) The    Cyber   Appellate    Tribunal   (Procedure    for     investigation    of
     Misbehaviour or Incapacity of Chairperson and Members) Rules, 2009

  g) The Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Blocking for
     Access of Information by Public), 2009

  h) The Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for interception,
     monitoring and decryption of information) Rules, 2009

  i) The Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguard for Monitoring
     and Collecting Traffic Data or Information) Rules, 2009

  j) The Information Technology (Use of electronic records and digital
     signatures) Rules, 2004

  k) The Information Technology (Security Procedure) Rules, 2004
                                                                                   22
   l) The Information Technology (Other Standards) Rules, 2003

   m) The Information Technology (Certifying Authority) Regulations, 2001

   n) Information Technology (Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000




   2.4.     Overview of other laws amended by the IT Act, 2000

The Indian Penal Code of 1860 and the Indian Evidence Act of 1872 was
amended by the IT Act of 2000 to keep in tune with the technological changes
that were rising rapidly.

   A. Indian Penal Code, 1860

      Amendments related to IPC were contained in Sec.91 and the First
      Schedule of the IT Act, 2000. Pursuant to the enactment of the
      Information Technology (amendment) Act, 2008, Sec.91 was deleted and
      the provisions with regard to Indian Penal Code were mentioned in Part
      III of the amendment Act.
      The amendments made to the Indian Penal Code are as follows –
          1) Amendment to Sec.4 –
            In section 4, - i) after clause (2), the following clause shall be
            inserted namely: - (3) any person in any place without and beyond
            India committing offence targeting a computer resource located in
            India ii) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be
            substituted, namely:- (a) the word "offence" includes every act
            committed outside India which, if committed in India would be
            punishable under this code. (b) the expression "computer resource"
            shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (k) of subsection (1)
            of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
          2) Amendment of Sec.40 –
                                                                               23




                                                                       www.taxguru.in
        In clause (2), after the figure "117", the figures "118,119 and 120"
        shall be inserted.
     3) Amendment of Sec.118 –
        In section 118, for the words "voluntarily conceals, by any act or
        illegal omission, the existence of a design", the words "voluntarily
        conceals by any act or omission or by the use of encryption or any
        other information hiding tool, the existence of a design" shall be
        substituted.
     4) Amendment of Sec.119 –
        In section 119, for the words "voluntarily conceals, by any act or
        illegal omission, the existence of a design", the words "voluntarily
        conceals by any act or omission or by the use of encryption or any
        other information hiding tool, the existence of a design" shall be
        substituted.
     5) Amendment of Sec.464 –
        In section 464, for the words "digital signature" wherever they
        occur, the words "electronic signature" shall be substituted.


B. Indian Evidence Act, 1872
  Amendments related to the evidence Act were contained in Sec.92 and
  the Second Schedule of the IT Act, 2000. Pursuant to the enactment of
  the Information Technology (amendment) Act, 2008, Sec.92 was deleted
  and the provisions with regard to the Indian Evidence Act were
  mentioned in Part IV of the amendment Act.
     1) Amendment of Sec.3 –
        In section 3 relating to interpretation clause, in the paragraph
        appearing at the end, for the words "digital signature" and "Digital
        Signature Certificate", the words "Electronic signature" and
        "Electronic Signature Certificate" shall be respectively substituted.


                                                                            24
2) Insertion of new Sec.45A – Opinion of Examiner of Electronic
  evidence –
  45A: When in a proceeding, the Court has to form an opinion on
  any matter relating to any information transmitted or stored in any
  computer resource or any other electronic or digital form, the
  opinion of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in
  section 79A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, is a relevant
  fact. Explanation: For the purposes of this section, an Examiner of
  Electronic Evidence shall be an expert
3) Amendment of Sec.47A –
  In section 47A,- (i) for the words "digital signature", the words
  "electronic signature" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "Digital
  Signature Certificate", the words "Electronic Signature Certificate"
  shall be substituted.
4) Amendment of Sec.67A –
  In section 67 A, - for the words "digital signature", the words
  "electronic signature" shall be substituted.
5) Amendment of Sec.85A –
  In section 85A, for the words "digital signature", wherever they
  occur, the words "electronic signature" shall be substituted.
6) Amendment of Sec.85B –
  In section 85B, - for the words "digital signature", wherever they
  occur, the words "electronic signature" shall be substituted.
7) Amendment of Sec.85C –
  In section 85C, for the words "Digital Signature Certificate", the
  words "Electronic Signature Certificate" shall be substituted.
8) Amendment of Sec.90A –
  In section 90A, the words "digital signature", at both places where
  they occur, the words "electronic signature" shall be substituted.


                                                                       25




                                                               www.taxguru.in
   2.5.     National Policy on Information Technology 2012

The Union Cabinet has recently in September 2012, approved the National
Policy on Information Technology 2012. The Policy aims to leverage Information
& Communication Technology (ICT) to address the country’s economic and
developmental challenges.

The vision of the Policy is “To strengthen and enhance India’s position as the
Global IT hub and to use IT and cyber space as an engine for rapid, inclusive
and substantial growth in the national economy”. The Policy envisages among
other objectives, to increase revenues of IT and ITES Industry from 100 Billion
USD at present to 300 Billion USD by 2020 and expand exports from 69 Billion
USD at present to 200 Billion USD by 2020. It also aims to create a pool of 10
million additional skilled manpower in ICT.

The thrust areas of the policy include:

1. To increase revenues of IT and ITES (Information Technology Enabled
Services) Industry from 100 Billion USD currently to 300 Billion USD by 2020
and expand exports from 69 Billion USD currently to 200 Billion USD by 2020.

2. To gain significant global market-share in emerging technologies and
Services.

3. To promote innovation and R&D in cutting edge technologies and
development of applications and solutions in areas like localization, location
based services, mobile value added services, Cloud Computing, Social Media
and Utility models.

4. To encourage adoption of ICTs in key economic and strategic sectors to
improve their competitiveness and productivity.



                                                                             26
5. To provide fiscal benefits to SMEs and Startups for adoption of IT in value
creation

6. To create a pool of 10 million additional skilled manpower in ICT.

7. To make at least one individual in every household e-literate.

8. To provide for mandatory delivery of and affordable access to all public
services in electronic mode.

9.   To    enhance   transparency,   accountability,   efficiency,   reliability   and
decentralization in Government and in particular, in delivery of public services.

10. To leverage ICT for key Social Sector initiatives like Education, Health,
Rural Development and Financial Services to promote equity and quality.

11. To make India the global hub for development of language technologies, to
encourage and facilitate development of content accessible in all Indian
languages and thereby help bridge the digital divide.

12. To enable access of content and ICT applications by differently-abled people
to foster inclusive development.

13. To leverage ICT for expanding the workforce and enabling life-long learning.

14. To strengthen the Regulatory and Security Framework for ensuring a
Secure and legally compliant Cyberspace ecosystem.

15. To adopt Open standards and promote open source and open technologies

The Policy has however not yet been notified in the Official Gazette.




                                                                                    27




                                                                           www.taxguru.in
   3. OVERVIEW OF THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000

The Information Technology Act was enacted with a view to give a fillip to the
growth of electronic based transactions, to provide legal recognition for e-
commerce and e-transactions, to facilitate e-governance, to prevent computer
based crimes and ensure security practices and procedures in the context of
widest possible use of information technology worldwide.

Applicability of the Act

The Act will apply to the whole of India unless otherwise mentioned. It applies
also to any offence or contravention there under committed outside India by
any person.

The Act shall not apply to the following documents or transactions –

      A negotiable instrument as defined in Sec.13 of the Negotiable
       Instruments Act, 1881;

      A power of attorney as defined in Sec.1A of the Powers of Attorney Act,
       1882;

      A trust as defined in Section 3 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882;

      A Will as defined in Sec.2(h) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 including
       any other testamentary disposition by whatever name called;

      Any contract for the sale or conveyance of immovable property or any
       interest in such property.

Scheme of the Act

       -       Chapter – I – Preliminary

       -       Chapter – II – Digital Signature and Electronic Signature (Sections
                      3 & 3A)
                                                                                28
   -    Chapter – III – Electronic Governance (Sections 4 to 10A)

   -    Chapter – IV – Attribution, Acknowledgement and Dispatch of
               Electronic Records (Sections 11 to 13)

   -    Chapter – V – Secure electronic records and secure electronic
               signatures (Sections 14 to 16)

   -    Chapter – VI – Regulation of Certifying Authorities (Sections 17 to
               34)

   -    Chapter – VII – Electronic Signature Certificates (Sections 35 to 39)

   -    Chapter – VIII – Duties of Subscribers (Sections 40 to 42)

   -    Chapter – IX – Penalties, Compensation and Adjudication (Sections
               43 to 47)

   -    Chapter X – The Cyber Appellate Tribunal (Sections 48 to 64)

   -    Chapter XI – Offences (Sections 65 to 78)

   -    Chapter XII – Intermediaries not to be liable in certain cases
               (Section 79)

   -    Chapter XIIA – Examiner of Electronic Evidence (Section 79A)

   -    Chapter XIII – Miscellaneous (Sections 80 to 90)

First Schedule – Documents or Transactions to which the Act shall not
apply

Second Schedule – Electronic signature or Electronic authentication
technique or procedure




                                                                           29




                                                                     www.taxguru.in
Important provisions of the Act

   1) Digital signature and Electronic signature

Digital Signatures provide a viable solution for creating legally enforceable
electronic records, closing the gap in going fully paperless by completely
eliminating the need to print documents for signing. Digital signatures enable
the replacement of slow and expensive paper-based approval processes with
fast, low-cost, and fully digital ones. The purpose of a digital signature is the
same as that of a handwritten signature. Instead of using pen and paper, a
digital signature uses digital keys (public-key cryptography). Like the pen and
paper method, a digital signature attaches the identity of the signer to the
document and records a binding commitment to the document. However,
unlike a handwritten signature, it is considered impossible to forge a digital
signature the way a written signature might be. In addition, the digital
signature assures that any changes made to the data that has been signed
cannot go undetected.

Digital signatures are easily transportable, cannot be imitated by someone else
and can be automatically time-stamped. A digital signature can be used with
any kind of message, whether it is encrypted or plaintext. Thus Digital
Signatures provide the following three features:-

      Authentication - Digital signatures are used to authenticate the source of
       messages. The ownership of a digital signature key is bound to a specific
       user and thus a valid signature shows that the message was sent by that
       user.

      Integrity - In many scenarios, the sender and receiver of a message need
       assurance that the message has not been altered during transmission.
       Digital Signatures provide this feature by using cryptographic message
       digest functions.

                                                                               30
      Non Repudiation – Digital signatures ensure that the sender who has
       signed the information cannot at a later time deny having signed it.

A handwritten signature scanned and digitally attached with a document does
not qualify as a Digital Signature. An ink signature can be easily replicated
from one document to another by copying the image manually or electronically.
Digital Signatures cryptographically bind an electronic identity to an electronic
document and the digital signature cannot be copied to another document.

Digital Signature under the IT Act, 2000

Digital signature means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber
by means of an electronic method or procedure in accordance with the
provisions of section 3.

Section 3 deals with the conditions subject to which an electronic record may
be authenticated by means of affixing digital signature which is created in two
definite steps.

First, the electronic record is converted into a message digest by using a
mathematical function known as ‘Hash function’ which digitally freezes the
electronic record thus ensuring the integrity of the content of the intended
communication contained in the electronic record. Any tampering with the
contents of the electronic record will immediately invalidate the digital
signature.

Secondly, the identity of the person affixing the digital signature is
authenticated through the use of a private key which attaches itself to the
message digest and which can be verified by anybody who has the public key
corresponding to such private key. This will enable anybody to verify whether
the electronic record is retained intact or has been tampered with since it was
so fixed with the digital signature. It will also enable a person who has a public
key to identify the originator of the message.
                                                                                31




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
‘Hash function’ means an algorithm mapping or translation of one sequence of
bits into another, generally smaller, set known as
"Hash Result" such that an electronic record yields the same hash result every
time the algorithm is executed with the same electronic record as its input
making it computationally infeasible to derive or reconstruct the original
electronic record from the hash result produced by the algorithm; that two
electronic records can produce the same hash result using the algorithm.


Digital signatures are a means to ensure validity of electronic transactions
however who guarantees about the authenticity that such signatures are
indeed valid or not false. In order that the keys be secure the parties must have
a high degree of confidence in the public and private keys issued.

Digital Signature is not like our handwritten signature. It is a jumble of letters
and digits. It looks something like this.

----- BEGIN SIGNATURE----

Uz5xHz7DxFwvBAh24zPAQCmOYhT47gvuvzO0YbDA5txg5bN1Ni3hgPgnRz8Fw
xGU
oDnj7awl7BwSBeW4MSG7/3NS7oZyD/AWO1Uy2ydYD4UQt/w3d6D2Ilv3L8EO
iHiH        +r5K8Gpe5zK5CLV+zBKwGY47n6Bpi9JCYXz5YwXj4JxTT+y8=gy5N
----- END SIGNATURE ------




                                                                                32
Electronic Signature
Electronic signature has also been dealt with under Section 3A of the IT Act,
2000. A subscriber can authenticate any electronic record by such electronic
signature or electronic authentication technique which is considered reliable
and may be specified in the Second Schedule.
Any electronic signature or electronic authentication technique will be
considered reliable if-
(a) the signature creation data or the authentication data are, within the
context in which they are used, linked to the signatory or , as the case may be,
the authenticator and of no other person;
(b) the signature creation data or the authentication data were, at the time of
signing, under the control of the signatory or, as the case may be, the
authenticator and of no other person;
(c) any alteration to the electronic signature made after affixing such signature
is detectable;
(d) any alteration to the information made after its authentication by electronic
signature is detectable; and
                                                                               33




                                                                       www.taxguru.in
(e) it fulfills such other conditions which may be prescribed.
An electronic signature will be deemed to be a secure electronic signature if-
(i) the signature creation data, at the time of affixing signature, was under the
exclusive control of signatory and no other person; and
(ii) the signature creation data was stored and affixed in such exclusive manner
as may be prescribed. (Sec.15)


An Amendment to the IT Act in 2008 introduced the term electronic signatures.
The implication of this Amendment is that it has helped to broaden the scope
of the IT Act to include new techniques as and when technology becomes
available for signing electronic records apart from Digital Signatures.


   2) E-Governance

E-governance or Electronic Governance is dealt with under Sections 4 to 10A of
the IT Act, 2000.

It provides for legal recognition of electronic records and Electronic signature
and also provides for legal recognition of contracts formed through electronic
means.

Filing of any form, application or other documents, creation, retention or
preservation of records, issue or grant of any license or permit or receipt or
payment in Government offices and its agencies may be done through the
means of electronic form.

The Government may authorise any any service provider to set up, maintain
and upgrade the computerized facilities and perform such other services as it
may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette for efficient delivery of
services to the public through electronic means. Service provider so authorized
includes any individual, private agency, private company, partnership firm,
sole proprietor form or any such other body or agency which has been granted
                                                                                 34
permission by the appropriate Government to offer services through electronic
means in accordance with the policy governing such service sector.


Where any law provides that documents, records or information should be
retained for any specific period, then such documents, records or information
retained in the electronic form will also be covered, if the information contained
therein remains accessible; the electronic record is retained in the format in
which it was originally generated, sent or received or in a format which can be
demonstrated to represent accurately the information originally generated, sent
or received and the details which will facilitate the identification of the origin,
destination, date and time of dispatch or receipt of such electronic record are
available in the electronic record.


Where any law provides for audit of documents, records or information, then
that provision will also be applicable for audit of documents, records or
information processed and maintained in electronic form.


Where any law provides that any rule, regulation, order, bye-law, notification or
any other matter should be published in the Official Gazette, then, such
requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such rule, regulation,
order, bye-law, notification or any other matter is published in the Official
Gazette or Electronic Gazette.
However, the above mentioned provisions do not give a right to anybody to
compel any Ministry or Department of the Government to use electronic means
to accept, issue, create, retain and preserve any document or execute any
monetary transaction.
The following are some of the eGovernance applications already using the
Digital Signatures:-




                                                                                 35




                                                                         www.taxguru.in
      •   MCA21 – a Mission Mode project under NeGP (National e-governance
          plan) which is one of the first few e-Governance projects under NeGP
          to successfully implement Digital Signatures in their project
      •   Income Tax e-filing
      •   Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC)
      •   Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT)
      •   RBI Applications (SFMS : structured Financial Messaging System)
      •   National e-Governance Services Delivery Gateway (NSDG)
      •   eProcurement
      •   eOffice
      •   eDistrict applications of UP, Assam etc


   3) Attribution, Acknowledgement and Dispatch of Electronic Records

Attribution of electronic records is dealt with under Sec.11 of the IT Act, 2000.
An electronic record will be attributed to the originator - if it was sent by the
originator himself; by a person who had the authority to act on behalf of the
originator in respect of that electronic record; or by an information system
programmed by or on behalf of the originator to operate automatically.

According to Section 12, the addressee may acknowledge the receipt of the
electronic record either in a particular manner or form as desired by the
originator and in the absence of such requirement, by communication of the
acknowledgement to the addresses or by any conduct that would sufficiently
constitute acknowledgement. Normally if the originator has stated that the
electronic record will be binding only on receipt of the acknowledgement, then
unless such acknowledgement is received, the record is not binding. However,
if the acknowledgement is not received within the stipulated time period or in
the absence of the time period, within a reasonable time, the originator may
notify the addressee to send the acknowledgement, failing which the electronic
record will be treated as never been sent.
                                                                               36
Time and place of dispatch and receipt of electronic record is covered under
Sec.13 of the IT Act, 2000. The dispatch of an electronic record occurs when it
enters a computer resource outside the control of the originator. Unless
otherwise agreed between the originator and the addressee, the time of receipt
of an electronic record will be determined as follows, namely –
         a) if the addressee has designated a computer resource for the
            purpose of receiving electronic records –
                i. receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record enters
                   the designated computer resource; or
               ii. if the electronic record is sent to a computer resource of the
                   addressee that is not the designated computer resource,
                   receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record is
                   retrieved by the addressee;
         b) if the addressee has not designated a computer resource along
            with specified timings, if any, receipt occurs when the electronic
            record enters the computer resource of the addressee.
An electronic record is generally deemed to be dispatched at the place where
the originator has his place of business, and is deemed to be received at the
place where the addressee has his place of business.

If the originator or the addressee has more than one place of business, the
principal place of business will be the place of business. If the originator or the
addressee does not have a place of business, his usual place of residence will
be deemed to be the place of business. "Usual Place of Residence", in relation to
a body corporate, means the place where it is registered.


   4) Certifying Authorities


A Certifying Authority is a trusted body whose central responsibility is to issue,
revoke, renew and provide directories of Digital Certificates. Certifying

                                                                                 37




                                                                         www.taxguru.in
Authority means a person who has been granted a license to issue an
Electronic Signature Certificate under section 24.
Provisions with regard to Certifying Authorities are covered under Chapter VI
i.e. Sec.17 to Sec.34 of the IT Act, 2000. It contains detailed provisions relating
to the appointment and powers of the Controller and Certifying Authorities.


Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA)

The IT Act provides for the Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA) to license
and regulate the working of Certifying Authorities. The Certifying Authorities
(CAs) issue digital signature certificates for electronic authentication of users.

The CCA certifies the public keys of CAs using its own private key, which
enables users in the cyberspace to verify that a given certificate is issued by a
licensed CA. For this purpose it operates, the Root Certifying Authority of India
(RCAI). The CCA also maintains the National Repository of Digital Certificates
(NRDC), which contains all the certificates issued by all the CAs in the
country.

The functions of the Controller are –
           (a) to exercise supervision over the activities of the Certifying
              Authorities;
           (b) certify public keys of the Certifying Authorities;
           (c) lay down the standards to be maintained by the Certifying
              Authorities;
           (d) specify the qualifications and experience which employees of the
              Certifying Authorities should possess;
           (e) specify the conditions subject to which the Certifying Authorities
              shall conduct their business;




                                                                                     38
         (f) specify the content of written, printed or visual material and
            advertisements that may be distributed or used in respect of a
            Electronic Signature Certificate and the Public Key;
         (g) specify the form and content of a Electronic Signature Certificate
            and the key;
         (h) specify the form and manner in which accounts shall be
            maintained by the Certifying Authorities;
         (i) specify the terms and conditions subject to which auditors may be
            appointed and the remuneration to be paid to them;
         (j) facilitate the establishment of any electronic system by a Certifying
            Authority either solely or jointly with other Certifying Authorities
            and regulation of such systems;
         (k) specify the manner in which the Certifying Authorities shall
            conduct their dealings with the subscribers;
         (l) resolve any conflict of interests between the Certifying Authorities
            and the subscribers;
         (m)lay down the duties of the Certifying Authorities;
         (n) maintain a data-base containing the disclosure record of every
            Certifying Authority containing such particulars as may be
            specified by regulations, which shall be accessible to the public.


Controller has the power to grant recognition to foreign certifying authorities
with the previous approval of the Central Government, which will be subject to
such conditions and restrictions imposed by regulations.




                                                                                 39




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
Root Certifying Authority of India (RCAI)

The Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA) has established the RCAI under
Section 18(b) of the IT Act to digitally sign the public keys of Certifying
Authorities (CAs) in the country. The RCAI is operated as per the standards
laid down under the Act.

The requirements fulfilled by the RCAI include the following:

      The licence issued to the CA is digitally signed by the CCA.
      All public keys corresponding to the signing private keys of a CA are
       digitally signed by the CCA.
      That these keys are signed by the CCA can be verified by a relying party
       through the CCA's website or CA's own website.
                                                                             40
The RCAI is operated using SmartTrust software. Authorized CCA personnel
initiate and perform Root CA functions in accordance with the Certification
Practice Statement of Root Certifying Authority of India. The term Root CA is
used to refer to the total CA entity, including the software and its operations.
The RCAI root certificate is the highest level of certification in India. It is used
to sign the public keys of the licensed CAs.

Certifying Authorities
Certifying Authorities (CAs) are responsible for issuing Digital Signature
Certificates to the end users. In order to facilitate greater flexibility to Certifying
Authorities, the CCA has allowed the creation of sub-CAs. As per this model, a
Certifying Authority can create a sub-CA to meet its business branding
requirement. However the sub-CA will be part of the same legal entity as the
CA. The sub-CA model will be based on the following principles:
       The CAs must not have more than one level of sub-CA.
       A sub-CA certificate issued by the CA is used for issuing end entity
        certificates.
       A CA with sub-CA must necessarily issue end entity certificates only
        through its sub-CA. The only exception will be for code signing and time
        stamping certificates, which may directly be issued by the CA.


The licensed Certifying Authorities (CAs) are –
 i.     Safescrypt – a private Certifying Authority
 ii.    NIC – an organisation of Govt. of India, issuing certificates to
        Government organisations
iii.    IDRBT – established by Reserve Bank of India for issuing certificates to
        the banking industry
iv.     TCS – private certifying authority to issue certificates to individuals,
        company and government users
 v.     MTNL

                                                                                    41




                                                                            www.taxguru.in
 vi.       Customs and Central Excise
vii.       (n)Code Solutions CA (GNFC)
viii.      e-Mudhra


Who can become a Certifying Authority?
The following persons can apply for grant of a licence to issue Digital Signature
Certificates, namely:-
        (a) an individual, being a citizen of India and having a capital of five crores
           of rupees or more in his business or profession;
        (b) a company having–
           (i) paid up capital of not less than five crores of rupees; and
           (ii) net worth of not less than fifty crores of rupees:
           No company in which the equity share capital held in aggregate by the
           Non-resident    Indians,   Foreign    Institutional   Investors,   or   foreign
           companies, exceeds forty-nine per cent of its capital, will be eligible for
           grant of licence.
           In a case where the company has been registered under the Companies
           Act, 1956 during the preceding financial year or in the financial year
           during which it applies for grant of licence under the Act and whose
           main object is to act as Certifying Authority, the net worth referred to in
           sub-clause (ii) will be the aggregate net worth of its majority shareholders
           holding at least 51% of paid equity capital, being the Hindu Undivided
           Family, firm or company. Majority shareholders should not include Non-
           resident Indian, foreign national, Foreign Institutional Investor and
           foreign company.
           The majority shareholders of a company whose net worth has been
           determined on the basis of such majority shareholders should not sell or
           transfer its equity shares held in such company- unless such a company
           acquires or has its own net worth of not less than fifty crores of rupees
           and without prior approval of the Controller.
                                                                                        42
   (c) a firm having –
      (i) capital subscribed by all partners of not less than five crores of rupees;
and
      (ii) net worth of not less than fifty crores of rupees.
      No firm, in which the capital held in aggregate by any Non-resident
      Indian, and foreign national, exceeds forty-nine per cent of its capital,
      will be eligible for grant of licence.
      In a case where the firm has been registered under the Indian
      Partnership Act, 1932 during the preceding financial year or in the
      financial year during which it applies for grant of licence under the Act
      and whose main object is to act as Certifying Authority, the net worth
      referred to in sub-clause (ii) should be the aggregate net worth of all of its
      partners. The partners should not include Non-resident Indian and
      foreign national. The partners of a firm whose net worth has been
      determined on the basis of such partners, should not sell or transfer its
      capital held in such firm - unless such firm has acquired or has its own
      net worth of not less than fifty crores of rupees and without prior
      approval of the Controller.
   (d) Central Government or a State Government or any of the Ministries or
      Departments, Agencies or Authorities of such Governments


Submission of performance bond
The applicant should submit a performance bond or furnish a banker's
guarantee from a scheduled bank in favour of the Controller in such form and
in such manner as may be approved by the Controller for an amount of not
less than five crores of rupees and the performance bond or banker's guarantee
will remain valid for a period of six years from the date of its submission.




                                                                                  43




                                                                          www.taxguru.in
Submission of application
Every application for a licensed Certifying Authority should be made to the
Controller in the form given in Schedule I of the Information Technology
(Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000.
Rule 10 of IT (Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000 prescribes the following
documents to be submitted along with the application –
   (a) a Certification Practice Statement (CPS);
   (b) a statement including the procedures with respect to identification of the
      applicant;
   (c) a statement for the purpose and scope of anticipated Digital Signature
      Certificate technology, management, or operations to be outsourced;
   (d) certified copies of the business registration documents of Certifying
      Authority that intends to be licensed;
   (e) a description of any event, particularly current or past insolvency, that
      could materially affect the applicant's ability to act as a Certifying
      Authority;
   (f) an undertaking by the applicant that to its best knowledge and belief it
      can and will comply with the requirements of its Certification Practice
      Statement;
   (g) an undertaking that the Certifying Authority's operation would not
      commence until its operation and facilities associated with the functions
      of generation, issue and management of Digital Signature Certificate are
      audited by the auditors and approved by the Controller in accordance
      with rule 20;
   (h) an undertaking to submit a performance bond or banker's guarantee in
      accordance with sub-rule (2) of rule 8 within one month of Controller
      indicating his approval for the grant of licence to operate as a Certifying
      Authority;
   (i) any other information required by the Controller.


                                                                               44
Apart from the above mentioned documents, the following particulars also need
to be furnished –
   i.   Company Profile/Experience of Individuals
  ii.   For an individual, proof of capital of Rs. 5 crores or more in his business
        or profession
 iii.   For a company/firm,
           a. proof of paid-up capital not less than Rs. 5 crores
           b. proof of net worth not less than Rs. 50 crores
 iv.    Proof of Equity (Proof that equity share capital held in aggregate by NRIs,
        FIIs or foreign companies does not exceed 49% of its capital)
  v.    An undertaking to submit Performance Bond or Banker’s Guarantee
        valid for six years from a scheduled bank for an amount not less than
        Rs. 5 crores in accordance with Rule 10(ii)(h) of the IT Act.
 vi.    Crossed cheque or bank draft for Rs. 25,000/- (for fresh application) or
        Rs.5,000/- (for renewal) in favour of the Pay & Accounts Officer, DIT,
        New Delhi. Both fees are non-refundable.
vii.    Certified true copies of the company’s incorporation, articles of
        association etc.
viii.   Original business profile report with certification from Registrar of
        Companies.
 ix.    Audited accounts for the past 3 years (if applicable).
  x.    The CA’s Certification Practice Statement (CPS).
 xi.    Technical specifications of the CA system and CA security policies,
        standards and infrastructure available/proposed and locations of
        facilities.
xii.    Information Technology and Security Policy proposed to be followed by
        the CA in its operations.
xiii.   Statement addressing the manner in which the CA shall comply with the
        requirements stipulated in the IT Act, Rules and Regulations.
xiv.    Organizational chart and details of all trusted personnel.
                                                                                 45




                                                                         www.taxguru.in
 xv.    Date by which the applicant will be ready for audit to start. The
        application shall be deemed to have been received on this date for
        processing purposes.
xvi.    Date by which commencement of CA operations is proposed.
xvii.   An undertaking by the applicant that they will make payment to the
        Auditor appointed by the CCA at the rate to be prescribed by the CCA.
 The Controller reserves the right to call for any other information that may be
 required to process the application. The application for licence to operate as a
 Certifying Authority, including all supporting documents, must be submitted in
 triplicate. These should be in the form of three identical sets numbered 1, 2
 and 3.


 Issuance of licence
 The Controller should within four weeks from the date of receipt of the
 application, after considering the documents accompanying the application and
 such other factors, as he may deem fit, grant or renew the licence or reject the
 application. In exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in
 writing, the period of four weeks may be extended to such period, not exceeding
 eight weeks in all as the Controller may deem fit.
 If the application for licensed Certifying Authority is approved, then the
 applicant should submit a performance bond or furnish a banker's guarantee
 within one month from the date of such approval to the Controller and execute
 an agreement with the Controller binding himself to comply with the terms and
 conditions of the licence and the provisions of the Act and the rules made
 thereunder.


 The licence will be valid for a period of five years from the date of its issue. The
 licence is not transferable. The provisions that are applicable for obtaining
 fresh licence will be applicable for renewal of licence also. Every application for
 renewal should be made atleast 45 days before the date of expiry.
                                                                                   46
Every Certifying Authority should display its licence at a conspicuous place of
the premises in which it carries on its business.


Security Guidelines for Certifying Authorities
The Certifying Authorities will have the sole responsibility of integrity,
confidentiality and protection of information and information assets employed
in its operation, considering classification, declassification, labeling, storage,
access and destruction of information assets according to their value,
sensitivity and importance of operation.
Information Technology Security Guidelines and Security Guidelines for
Certifying Authorities aimed at protecting the integrity, confidentiality and
availability of service of Certifying Authority are given in Schedule-II and
Schedule-III of the IT (Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000.
The Certifying Authority should formulate its Information Technology and
Security Policy for operation complying with these guidelines and submit it to
the Controller before commencement of operation. (Rule 19 of IT (Certifying
Authorities) Rules, 2000)


Commencement of Operation by Licensed Certifying Authorities
The licensed Certifying Authority can commence its commercial operation of
generation and issue of Digital Signature only after-
   (a) it has confirmed to the Controller the adoption of Certification Practice
      Statement;
   (b) it has generated its key pair, namely, private and corresponding public
      key, and submitted the public key to the Controller;
   (c) the installed facilities and infrastructure associated with all functions of
      generation, issue and management of Digital Signature Certificate have
      been audited by the accredited auditor;


                                                                                 47




                                                                         www.taxguru.in
   (d) it has submitted the arrangement for cross certification with other
      licensed Certifying Authorities within India to the Controller.


Procedures to be followed by Certifying Authorities
Every Certifying Authority should -
       (a)    make use of hardware, software, and procedures that are secure
              from intrusion and misuse:
       (b)    provide a reasonable level of reliability in its services which are
              reasonably suited to the performance of intended functions;
       (c)    adhere to security procedures to ensure that the secrecy and
              privacy of the Electronic Signature are assured;
       (d)    be the repository of all Electronic Signature Certificates issued
              under the IT Act;
       (e)    publish information regarding its practices, Electronic Signature
              Certificates and current status of such certificates; and
       (f)    observe such other standards as may be specified by regulations.


Audit of Certifying Authority
According to Rule 31 of the IT (Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000, the
Certifying Authority should get its operations audited annually by an auditor
and such audit should include –
      (i)     security policy and planning;
      (ii)    physical security;
      (iii)   technology evaluation;
      (iv)    Certifying Authority's services administration;
      (v)     relevant Certification Practice Statement;
      (vi)    compliance to relevant Certification Practice Statement;
      (vii)   contracts/agreements;
      (viii) regulations prescribed by the Controller;
      (ix)    policy requirements of Certifying Authorities Rules, 2000
                                                                                 48
The Certifying Authority should conduct half yearly audit of the Security Policy,
physical security and planning of its operation and a quarterly audit of its
repository.
The Certifying Authority should submit copy of each audit report to the
Controller within four weeks of the completion of such audit and where
irregularities are found, the Certifying Authority should take immediate
appropriate action to remove such irregularities.
The auditor should be independent of the Certifying Authority being audited
and should not be a software or hardware vendor which is, or has been
providing services or supplying equipment to the said Certifying Authority. The
auditor and the Certifying Authority should not have any current or planned
financial, legal or other relationship, other than that of an auditor and the
audited party.


Registration Authority (RA)
A Registration Authority (RA) acts as the verifier for the Certifying Authority
before a Digital Signature Certificate is issued to a requestor. The Registration
Authorities (RAs) process user requests, confirm their identities, and induct
them into the user database.


   5) Electronic Signature Certificates


Provisions relating to Electronic/Digital signature certificates are covered in
Chapter VII i.e. Secs.35 to 39 of the IT Act, 2000 and Rules 23 to 30 of the IT
(Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000 and IT (Certifying Authority) Regulations,
2001.
A Digital Signature Certificate is an electronic document which uses a digital
signature to bind together a public key with an identity — information such as
the name of a person or an organization, their address, and so forth. The
                                                                               49




                                                                       www.taxguru.in
certificate can be used to verify that a public key belongs to the individual.
Digital certificates are the digital equivalent (i.e. electronic format) of physical
or paper certificates. Examples of physical certificates are driver's licenses,
passports or membership cards.
Digital Signature Certificates is issued by the Certifying Authority (CA). The CA
is responsible for vetting all applications for Digital Signature Certificates, and
once satisfied, generates a Digital Certificate by digitally signing the Public key
of the individual along with other information using its own Private key.


The CCA has licensed eight Certifying Authorities in India to issue Digital
Signature Certificates to the end users. The National Informatics Centre issues
Digital Signature Certificates primarily to the Government/ PSU’s and
Statutory bodies. The Institute for Development of Research in Banking
Technology (IDRBT) issues Digital Signature Certificates primarily to the
banking and financial sector in India. The remaining CAs - Safescrypt, TCS,
MTNL, n(Code) Solutions and eMudhra issue Digital Signature Certificates to
all end users across all domains. More than 16 lakh Digital Signature
Certificates have been issued by the different CA’s in India.


Depending upon the requirement of assurance level and usage of Digital
Signature Certificate, the following are the classes of Digital Signature
Certificates:-
   1) Class -1 Certificate – issued to individuals/private subscribers to secure
      email messages.
   2) Class - 2 Certificates – issued as Managed Digital Certificates to
      employees/ partners/ affiliates/ customers of business and government
      organizations that are ready to assume the responsibility of verifying the
      accuracy of the information submitted by their employees/ partners/
      affiliates/ customers.


                                                                                  50
    3) Class - 3 Certificates - issued to individuals, companies and government
       organizations. They can be used both for personal and commercial
       purposes. They are typically used for electronic commerce applications
       such as electronic banking, electronic data interchange (EDI), and
       membership-based on-line services, where security is a major concern.


Different types of digital signature certificates that are issued:–
    1) Individual   Digital   Signature   Certificates   (Signing   Certificates)    -
       Individual Certificates serve to identify a person. It follows that the
       contents of this type of certificate include the full name and personal
       particulars of an individual. These certificates can be used for signing
       electronic documents and emails and implementing enhanced access
       control mechanisms for sensitive or valuable information.
    2) Server Certificates - Server Certificates identify a server (computer).
       Hence, instead of a name of a person, server certificates contain the host
       name e.g. "https://nsdg.gov.in/” or the IP address. Server certificates are
       used for 1 way or 2 way SSL to ensure secure communication of data
       over the network.
    3) Encryption Certificates - Encryption Certificates are used to encrypt the
       message. The Encryption Certificates use the Public Key of the recipient
       to encrypt the data so as to ensure data confidentiality during
       transmission of the message. Separate certificates for signatures and for
       encryption are available from different CAs.


Before the issue of the Digital Signature Certificate, the Certifying Authority
should -
 i.    confirm that the user's name does not appear in its list of compromised
       users;
 ii.   comply with the procedure as defined in his Certification Practice
       Statement including verification of identification and/or employment;
                                                                                    51




                                                                          www.taxguru.in
iii.      comply with all privacy requirements;
iv.       obtain a consent of the person requesting the Digital Signature
          Certificate, that the details of such Digital Signature Certificate can be
          published on a directory service.


The generation of the Digital Signature Certificate will involve:
       a) receipt of an approved and verified Digital Signature Certificate request;
       b) creating a new Digital Signature Certificate;
       c) binding the key pair associated with the Digital Signature Certificate to a
          Digital Signature Certificate owner;
       d) issuing the Digital Signature Certificate and the associated public key for
          operational use;
       e) a distinguished name associated with the Digital Signature Certificate
          owner; and
       f) a recognized and relevant policy as defined in Certification Practice
          Statement.


Certificate Revocation
Digital Signature Certificates are issued with a planned lifetime, which is
defined through a validity start date and an explicit expiration date. A
certificate may be issued with a validity of upto two years. Once issued, a
Certificate is valid until its expiration date.
However, various circumstances may cause a certificate to become invalid prior
to the expiration of the validity period. Such circumstances include change of
name (for example, change the subject of a certificate due to an employee’s
change of name), change of association between subject and CA (for example,
when an employee terminates employment with an organization), and
compromise or suspected compromise of the corresponding private key. Under
such circumstances, the issuing CA needs to revoke the certificate. In case a
Digital Signature Certificate is compromised, one should immediately contact
                                                                                   52
the respective CA to initiate revocation. The CA will then put the certificate in
the Certificate Revocation List.


   6) Duties of Subscribers


"Subscriber" means a person in whose name the Electronic Signature
Certificate is issued.
Chapter VIII i.e. Secs.40 to 42 of the IT Act, 2000 deals with the duties of
subscribers.
Where any Digital Signature Certificate, the public key of which corresponds to
the private key of that subscriber which is to be listed in the Digital Signature
Certificate has been accepted by a subscriber, the subscriber should generate
that key pair by applying the security procedure.
A subscriber will be deemed to have accepted a Digital Signature Certificate if
he publishes or authorizes the publication of a Digital Signature Certificate -
(a) to one or more persons;
(b) in a repository, or otherwise demonstrates his approval of the Digital
Signature Certificate in any manner.
By accepting a Digital Signature Certificate the subscriber certifies to all who
reasonably rely on the information contained in the Digital Signature
Certificate that -
(a) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key listed
in the Digital Signature Certificate and is entitled to hold the same;
(b) all representations made by the subscriber to the Certifying Authority and
all material relevant to the information contained in the Digital Signature
Certificate are true;
(c) all information in the Digital Signature Certificate that is within the
knowledge of the subscriber is true.




                                                                                  53




                                                                         www.taxguru.in
Every subscriber should exercise reasonable care to retain control of the
private key corresponding to the public key listed in his Digital Signature
Certificate and take all steps to prevent its disclosure.
Where the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital
Signature        Certificate    has    been   compromised,      the    subscriber    should
communicate the same without any delay to the Certifying Authority. An
application for revocation of the key pair should be made in Form online on the
website of the concerned Certifying Authority to enable revocation and
publication in the Certificate Revocation List. The Subscriber should encrypt
this transaction by using the public key of the Certifying Authority. The
transaction should be further authenticated with the private key of the
subscriber even though it may have already been compromised. The subscriber
will be liable till he has informed the Certifying Authority that the private key
has been compromised.


   7) Penalties and Offences


Section           Offence                     Penalty
under       IT
Act, 2000
Sec.43            Damage to computer, Compensation not exceeding one
                  computer system, etc.       crore    rupees   to    the   person   so
                                              affected
Sec.43A           Body corporate failure Compensation not exceeding five
                  to protect data             crore    rupees   to    the   person   so
                                              affected
Sec.44(a)         Failure      to     furnish Penalty not exceeding one lakh and
                  document, return or fifty thousand rupees for each such
                  report        to       the failure


                                                                                          54
            Controller        or      the
            Certifying Authority
Sec.44(b)   Failure     to    file   any Penalty not exceeding five thousand
            return or furnish any rupees for every day during which
            information, books or such failure continues
            other            documents
            within       the         time
            specified

Sec.44(c)   Failure     to    maintain Penalty not exceeding ten thousand
            books of account or rupees for every day during which
            records                         the failure continues
Sec.45      Where no penalty has Compensation                    not        exceeding
            been             separately twenty-five thousand rupees to the
            provided                        person      affected       by        such
                                            contravention   or     a   penalty    not
                                            exceeding    twenty-five        thousand
                                            rupees
Sec.65      Tampering                with Imprisonment up to three years, or
            Computer               source with fine which may extend up to
            documents                       two lakh rupees, or with both

Sec.66      Hacking                  with Imprisonment for a term which may
            Computer           systems, extend to three years or with fine
            Data alteration etc.            which may extend to five lakh
                                            rupees or with both
Sec.66A     Sending            offensive Imprisonment for a term which may
            messages           through extend to three years and with fine
            communication
            service etc.


                                                                                        55




                                                                                 www.taxguru.in
Sec.66B   Retains    any     stolen Imprisonment for a term which may
          computer resource or extend to three years or with fine
          communication device      which may extend to rupees one
                                    lakh or with both
Sec.66C   Fraudulent       use   of Imprisonment for a term which may
          electronic signature      extend to three years and shall also
                                    be liable to fine which may extend
                                    to rupees one lakh
Sec.66D   Cheats by personating Imprisonment for a term which may
          by   using   computer extend to three years and shall also
          resource                  be liable to fine which may extend
                                    to one lakh rupees
Sec.66E   Publishing       obscene Imprisonment which may extend to
          images                    three   years   or   with     fine   not
                                    exceeding two lakh rupees, or with
                                    both
Sec.66F   Cyber terrorism           Imprisonment which may extend to
                                    imprisonment for life

Sec.67    Publishes or transmits Imprisonment for a term which may
          unwanted material         extend to three years and with fine
                                    which may extend to five lakh
                                    rupees & in the event of a second or
                                    subsequent       conviction          with
                                    imprisonment of either description
                                    for a term which may extend to five
                                    years and also with fine which may
                                    extend to ten lakh rupees
Sec.67A   Publishes or transmits Imprisonment for a term which may
          sexually          explicit extend to five years and with fine

                                                                                56
          material                    which may extend to ten lakh
                                      rupees and in the event of second or
                                      subsequent          conviction   with
                                      imprisonment of either description
                                      for a term which may extend to
                                      seven years and also with fine
                                      which may extend to ten lakh
                                      rupees
Sec.67B   Abusing         children Imprisonment for a term which may
          online                      extend to five years and with a fine
                                      which may extend to ten lakh
                                      rupees and in the event of second or
                                      subsequent          conviction   with
                                      imprisonment of either description
                                      for a term which may extend to
                                      seven years and also with fine
                                      which may extend to ten lakh
                                      rupees
Sec.67C   Preservation           of Imprisonment for a term which may
          information           by extend to three years and shall also
          intermediary                be liable to fine
Sec.70    Un-authorised access Imprisonment for a term which may
          to protected system         extend to ten years and shall also
                                      be liable to fine
Sec.71    Misrepresentation      to Imprisonment for a term which may
          the Controller or the extend to two years, or with fine
          Certifying     Authority which may extend to one lakh
          for obtaining license rupees, or with both.
          or             Electronic


                                                                              57




                                                                       www.taxguru.in
               Signature Certificate


Sec.72         Breach                  of Imprisonment for a term which may
               Confidentiality    and extend to two years, or with fine
               Privacy                    which may extend to one lakh
                                          rupees, or with both
Sec.72A        Disclosure              of Imprisonment for a term which may
               information in breach extend to three years, or with a fine
               of contract                which may extend to five lakh
                                          rupees, or with both
Sec.73    & Publishing false digital Imprisonment for a term which may
74             signature certificates     extend to two years, or with fine
                                          which may extend to one lakh
                                          rupees, or with both


Jurisdiction

If a crime is committed on a computer or computer network in India by a
person resident outside India, then can the offence be tried by the Courts in
India?

According to Sec.1(2) of Information Technology Act, 2000, the Act extends to
the whole of India and also applies to any offence or contravention committed
outside India by any person. Further, Sec.75 of the IT Act, 2000 also mentions
about the applicability of the Act for any offence or contravention committed
outside India. According to this section, the Act will apply to an offence or
contravention committed outside India by any person, if the act or conduct
constituting the offence or contravention involves a computer, computer
system or computer network located in India.



                                                                              58
A Police officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police should
only investigate any offence under this Act. (Sec.78 of IT Act, 2000).

Without a duly signed extradition treaty or a multilateral cooperation
arrangement, trial of such offences and conviction is a difficult proposition.

   8) Intermediaries


Sec.79 deals with the immunity available to intermediaries. The Information
Technology (Intermediaries guidelines) Rules, 2011 governs the duties of
intermediaries.


"Intermediary" with respect to any particular electronic records, means any
person who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that
record or provides any service with respect to that record and includes telecom
service providers, network service providers, internet service providers, web
hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-auction
sites, online market places and cyber cafes.


Intermediary will not be liable for any third party information, data or
communication link hosted by him. It will apply only if –

      the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a
       communication system over which information made available by third
       parties is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted;

      the intermediary does not initiate the transmission or select the receiver
       of the transmission and select or modify the information contained in the
       transmission;

      the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties.


                                                                                 59




                                                                         www.taxguru.in
The intermediary will be held liable if he conspired or abetted or aided or
induced whether by threats or promise or otherwise in the commission of the
unlawful act. He will also be liable if upon receiving actual knowledge or on
being notified that any information, data or communication link residing in or
connected to a computer resource controlled by it is being used to commit an
unlawful act and it fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that
material.

The intermediary should observe the following due diligence while discharging
his duties –

      The intermediary should publish the rules and regulations, privacy policy
       and user agreement for access-or usage of the intermediary's computer
       resource by any person.

      Such rules and regulations, terms and conditions or user agreement
       shall inform the users of computer resource not to host, display, upload,
       modify, publish, transmit, update or share any information.
      The intermediary should not knowingly host or publish any information
       or   should   not   initiate   the   transmission,   select   the   receiver   of
       transmission, and select or modify the information contained in the
       transmission.
      The intermediary, on whose computer system the information is stored
       or hosted or published, upon obtaining knowledge by itself or been
       brought to actual knowledge by an affected person in writing or through
       email signed with electronic signature about any such information
       should act within thirty six hours and where applicable, work with user
       or owner of such information to disable such information. Further the
       intermediary should preserve such information and associated records
       for at least ninety days for investigation purposes.



                                                                                      60
   The Intermediary should inform its users that in case of non-compliance
    with rules and regulations, user agreement and privacy policy for access
    or usage of intermediary computer resource, the Intermediary has the
    right to immediately terminate the access or usage lights of the users to
    the computer resource of Intermediary and remove non-compliant
    information.
   The intermediary should strictly follow the provisions of the Act or any
    other laws for the time being in force.
   When required by lawful order, the intermediary should provide
    information or any such assistance to Government Agencies who are
    lawfully authorised for investigative, protective, cyber security activity.
   The intermediary should take all reasonable measures to secure its
    computer resource and information contained therein.
   The intermediary should report cyber security incidents and also share
    cyber security incidents related information with the Indian Computer
    Emergency Response Team.
   The intermediary should not knowingly deploy or install or modify the
    technical configuration of computer resource or become party to any
    such act which may change or has the potential to change the normal
    course of operation of the computer resource than what it is supposed to
    "perform thereby circumventing any law for the time being in force.
   The intermediary should publish on its website the name of the
    Grievance Officer and his contact details as well as mechanism by which
    users or any victim who suffers as a result of access or usage of
    computer resource by any person can notify their complaints against
    such access or usage of computer resource of the intermediary or other
    matters pertaining to the computer resources made available by it. The
    Grievance Officer should redress the complaints within one month from
    the date of receipt of complaint.

                                                                                  61




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
4. OVERVIEW OF RULES ISSUED UNDER THE IT ACT, 2000




a) The Information Technology (Reasonable security practices and
  procedures and sensitive personal data or information) Rules, 2011
  These rules are regarding sensitive personal data or information and are
  applicable to the body corporate or any person located within India. It
  basically require entities holding sensitive personal information of users
  to maintain certain specified security standards.

b) The Information Technology (Electronic Service Delivery) Rules,
  2011

  These rules provide for creation of a system of electronic delivery of
  services. Under the Electronic Service Delivery Rules the government can
  specify certain services, such as applications, certificates, licenses etc, to
  be delivered electronically.

c) The Information Technology (Intermediaries guidelines) Rules, 2011

  These   rules   provide   the   rights   and   responsibilities   of   internet
  intermediaries in India. If the Internet intermediaries follow these rules
  and exercise proper cyber due diligence, they are entitled to a “safe
  harbour protection”. Otherwise, they are liable for various acts or
  omission occurring at their respective platforms once the matter has
  been brought to their notice.

d) The Information Technology (Guidelines for Cyber Cafe) Rules, 2011

  According to these guidelines, cyber cafes should register themselves
  with an appropriate government agency, and provide services to users
                                                                               62
  only after establishing their identity. It also deals with maintenance of
  records of such identity as well as log of sites visited, among others.

e) The Cyber Appellate Tribunal (Salary, Allowances and other terms
  and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members) Rules, 2009

  These rules provide for the salary, allowances and terms of service of the
  Chairperson and members of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal.

f) The Cyber Appellate Tribunal (Procedure for investigation of
  Misbehaviour or Incapacity of Chairperson and Members) Rules,
  2009

  These rules provide for the procedure for investigation of misbehavior or
  incapacity of the Chairperson and members of the Cyber Appellate
  Tribunal.

g) The Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Blocking
  for Access of Information by Public), 2009

  The rules provide for the designation of an officer of the Central
  Government for the purpose of issuing direction for blocking for access
  by the public any information generated, transmitted, received, stored or
  hosted in any computer resource. It provides the procedure and the
  safeguards to be followed by the designated officer.

h) The   Information    Technology      (Procedure    and    Safeguards     for
  interception, monitoring and decryption of information) Rules, 2009

  These rules explain the procedure and safeguards subject to which such
  interception or monitoring or decryption may be carried out.




                                                                             63




                                                                     www.taxguru.in
i) The   Information    Technology     (Procedure    and   Safeguard    for
  Monitoring and Collecting Traffic Data or Information) Rules, 2009

  It contains the procedure for aggregate monitoring of communications
  and the procedural safeguards to be observed in them.

j) The Information Technology (Use of electronic records and digital
  signatures) Rules, 2004

  These rules deal with the manner and format in which the electronic
  records should be filed, created or issued. It also states the manner or
  method of payment of any fees or charges for filing or creating any
  electronic record.

k) The Information Technology (Security Procedure) Rules, 2004

  These rules prescribe the provisions relating to secure digital signatures
  and secure electronic records.

l) The Information Technology (Other Standards) Rules, 2003

  The rules deal with the standards to be observed by the Controller to
  ensure that the secrecy and security of the digital signatures are
  assured.

m) The Information Technology (Certifying Authority) Regulations,
  2001

  The regulation details the technical standards and procedures to be used
  by a Certifying Authority.

n) Information Technology (Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000




                                                                          64
This rule deals with licensing of Certifying authorities and the
procedures that need to be complied by them. It also prescribed the
eligibility, appointment and working of Certifying Authorities.




                                                                        65




                                                                  www.taxguru.in
   5. ELECTRONIC COMMERCE


Electronic commerce, commonly known as e-commerce or e-comm, is the
buying and selling of products or services over electronic systems such as
the Internet and other computer networks. Electronic commerce draws on such
technologies as electronic funds transfer, supply chain management, Internet
marketing, online        transaction       processing,        electronic         data
interchange (EDI), inventory    management systems,       and   automated        data
collection systems. Modern electronic commerce typically uses the World Wide
Web (www) at least at one point in the transaction's life-cycle, although it may
encompass a wider range of technologies such as e-mail, mobile devices and
telephones as well.

Contemporary electronic commerce involves everything from ordering "digital"
content for immediate online consumption, to ordering conventional goods and
services, to "meta" services to facilitate other types of electronic commerce.

On the institutional level, big corporations and financial institutions use the
internet to exchange financial data to facilitate domestic and international
business. Data integrity and security are very hot and pressing issues for
electronic commerce.

E-commerce can be divided into:


      E-tailing or "virtual storefronts" on Web sites with online catalogs,
       sometimes gathered into a "virtual mall".


      The gathering and use of demographic data through Web contacts.


      Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), the business-to-business exchange of
       data.

                                                                                   66
      E-mail and fax and their use as media for reaching prospects and
       established customers (for example, with newsletters).


      Business-to-business buying and selling.


      The security of business transactions.


E-commerce in India
India has an internet user base of over 100 million users. The penetration of e-
commerce is low compared to markets like the United States and the United
Kingdom but is growing at a much faster rate with a large number of new
entrants. The industry consensus is that growth is at an inflection point with
key drivers being:
      Increasing broadband Internet and 3Gpenetration.
      Rising standards of living and a burgeoning, upwardly mobile middle
       class with high disposable incomes.
      Availability of much wider product range compared to what is available
       at brick and mortar retailers.
      Busy lifestyles, urban traffic congestion and lack of time for offline
       shopping.
      Lower   prices   compared    to   brick   and   mortar   retail   driven   by
       disintermediation and reduced inventory and real estate costs.
      Increased usage of online classified sites, with more consumers buying
       and selling second-hand goods.
      Evolution of the online marketplace model with sites like ebay, Infibeam,
       and Tradus.


The India retail market is estimated at $470 Bn in 2011 and is expected to
grow to $675 Bn by 2016 and $850 Bn by 2020, – estimated CAGR of 7%.
According to Forrester, the e-commerce market in India is set to grow the

                                                                                  67




                                                                          www.taxguru.in
fastest within the Asia-Pacific Region at a CAGR of over 57% between 2012-
16. India e-tailing market in 2011 was about $600 Mn and expected to touch
$9 Bn by 2016 and $70 Bn by 2020 – estimated CAGR of 61%. The Online
Travel Industry is the biggest segment in eCommerce and is booming largely
due to the Internet-savvy urban population.

Some of the aspects of Indian e-commerce that are unique to India (and
potentially to other developing countries) are:

       Cash on Delivery as a preferred payment method. India has a vibrant
        cash economy as a result of which 80% of Indian e-commerce tends to be
        Cash on Delivery (COD).

       Direct Imports constitute a large component of online sales. Demand for
        international consumer products is growing much faster than in-country
        supply from authorized distributors and e-commerce offerings.



E-commerce websites are Internet intermediaries within the meaning of IT Act,
2000. "Intermediary" with respect to any particular electronic records, means
any person who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that
record or provides any service with respect to that record and includes telecom
service providers, network service providers, internet service providers, web
hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-auction
sites, online market places and cyber cafes. The IT (Intermediaries Guidelines)
Rules of 2011 regulate the functioning of e-commerce websites. Cyber law due
diligence is the main aspect that all e-commerce site owners should comply
with.




                                                                             68
    6. ELECTRONIC CONTRACTS


E-Contracts are conceptually very similar to the traditional paper-based
Commercial Contracts.
Electronic contracts (contracts that are not paper based but rather in
electronic form) are born out of the need for speed, convenience and efficiency.
In the electronic age, the whole transaction can be completed in seconds, with
both parties simply affixing their digital signatures to an electronic copy of the
contract. There is no need for delayed couriers and additional travelling costs
in such a scenario. The conventional law relating to contracts i.e. The Indian
Contract Act of 1872 is not sufficient to address all the issues that arise in
electronic contracts. The Information Technology Act solves some of the
peculiar issues that arise in the formation and authentication of electronic
contracts.
An e-contract is a contract modelled, executed and enacted by a software
system. Computer programs are used to automate business processes that
govern e-contracts.
Like any other contract, an e-contract also require the following –
 i.    Offer to be made – The offer is not made by website displaying the items
       for sale at a particular price. This is actually an invitation to offer and
       hence is revocable at any time up to the time of acceptance. The offer is
       made by the customer on placing the products in the virtual ‘basket’ or
       ‘shopping cart’ for payment.
 ii.   Offer to be accepted – The acceptance is usually undertaken by the
       business after the offer has been made by the consumer in relation with
       the invitation to offer. Offers and acceptances can be exchanged entirely
       by e-mail; the seller can offer goods or services (e.g. air tickets, software
       etc) through his website; users may need to accept an online agreement
       in order to be able to avail of the services.
                                                                                 69




                                                                          www.taxguru.in
 iii.   Lawful consideration – Contract to be enforceable by law must have
        lawful consideration, i.e., when both parties give and receive something
        in return.
 iv.    Intention to create legal relations
  v.    Parties must be competent to contract
 vi.    There must be free and genuine consent
vii.    Object of the contract must be lawful
viii.   There must be certainty and possibility of performance


Chapter IV of the Information Technology Act, 2000 i.e. sections 11, 12 and 13
covers the aspects of Attribution, Acknowledgment and Despatch of Electronic
Records.
According to Sec.10A of the IT Act, 2000, a communication or contract
shouldn’t be denied or declared void merely because it’s in electronic form. It
thereby acknowledges the legal validity of e-contracts.




                                                                              70
   7. CYBER CRIMES / CYBER FRAUDS

The Internet has become a basic fact of everyday life for millions of people
worldwide, from e-mail to online shopping. Ever faster and more accessible
connections available on a wider range of platforms, such as mobile phones or
person   to   person   portable   devices,   have     spurred   new   e-commerce
opportunities. Online shopping and banking are increasingly widespread and
over the next 10 years, the Net is expected to become as common as gas or
electricity. The invention of the computers has opened new avenues for the
fraudsters. It is an evil having its origin in the growing dependence on
computers in modern life.

Fraud is the intentional deception of a person or group for the purpose of
stealing property or money. Internet fraud includes any scheme using Web
sites, chat rooms, and email to offer nonexistent goods and services to
consumers or to communicate false information to consumers. Customers then
pay for the fraudulent goods over the Internet with their credit cards. Internet
fraud involves a wide variety of schemes limited only by the imagination and
creativity of a seller intent on deceiving a buyer. A few general characteristics
one can find in all cyber scams. Most scams are done by e-mail. They entice
users to give them critical information like usernames, passwords, credit card
information, or other types of account information.

Cyber fraud has the potential of hindering the economic and social
development of any nation. This is because among other dire consequences,
foreign investment is seriously discouraged. Cyber fraud can also destroy our
good and morally sound culture. This is because the youth will no longer work
but resort to that means to earn their living.




                                                                               71




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
   7.1.       Definition of cyber crime

At the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and
Treatment of Offenders, in a workshop devoted to the issues of crimes related
to computer networks, cybercrime was broken into two categories and defined
thus:
  a. Cybercrime in a narrow sense (computer crime): Any illegal behavior
        directed by means of electronic operations that targets the security of
        computer systems and the data processed by them.
  b. Cybercrime in a broader sense (computer-related crime): Any illegal
        behavior committed by means of, or in relation to, a computer system or
        network, including such crimes as illegal possession [and] offering or
        distributing information by means of a computer system or network.

The OECD Recommendations of 1986 included a working definition as a basis
for the study: Computer-related crime is considered as any illegal, unethical or
unauthorized behaviour relating to the automatic processing and the
transmission of data.

   7.2.       First Cyber Crime

The first recorded cyber crime took place in the year 1820! That is not
surprising considering the fact that the abacus, which is thought to be the
earliest form of a computer, has been around since 3500 B.C. in India, Japan
and China. The era of modern computers, however, began with the analytical
engine of Charle Babbage. In 1820, Joseph-Marie Jacquard, a textile
manufacturer in France, produced the loom. This device allowed the repetition
of a series of steps in the weaving of special fabrics. This resulted in a fear
amongst Jacquard's employees that their traditional employment and livelihood
were being threatened. They committed acts of sabotage to discourage


                                                                              72
Jacquard from further use of the new technology. This is the first recorded
cyber crime!

   7.3.        Types of cyber frauds

A wide variety of scams operate in the online environment, ranging from
fraudulent lottery schemes, travel and credit-related ploys, modem and web
page hijacking, and identity theft (ID theft) to name but a few. Many of these
scams, such as pyramid selling, are simply online variants of fraudulent
practices that have long existed offline. However, the Internet has given
criminals access to a worldwide base of consumer targets as well as more
opportunities to elude enforcement as they need not be in the same country, or
even in the same hemisphere, as their victims.

The Internet allows fraudsters to masquerade as legitimate traders behind
professional-looking websites or on virtual auction sites to advertise “free” or
“bargain” prices, “miracle” products, and “exciting” investment and business
opportunities. These deceptive and misleading offers trick unsuspecting
consumers into buying goods and services on line which turn out to be far less
than promised or even non-existent.

Many online scams originate in spam messages – usually through e-mail, but
sometimes through text messages (SMS), voice messages delivered by Internet
(Voice-over Internet Protocol or – VoIP) or other electronic channels. Spam has
evolved into a vehicle for the spread of fraud and other online abuses. Many e-
mail users will have received a message from a person claiming to be a
government official or member of the royal family of a foreign country (usually
in Africa), promising substantial sums of money in return for assistance in
transferring money out of the country. Commonly known as the “Nigerian”,
“West African” or “419” scam, once it has sucked in victims it convinces them
to make small advance payments for various reasons, such as banking
transaction fees. Needless to say, the victim never receives the promised
                                                                              73




                                                                      www.taxguru.in
substantial sums in return. Many pyramid and work-at-home schemes are also
distributed through spam and follow the “advance fee fraud” format of
requiring up-front payment or investment on the promise of high returns that
are never forthcoming.

Spam is a key tool for the spread of ID theft, luring people into disclosing
sensitive information such as credit card numbers or passwords. For example,
phishing spams falsely claim to come from legitimate and well-known financial
institutions or merchants. They ask recipients to click through on hyperlinks
in order to verify or update their online accounts. These hyperlinks direct users
to fake “look alike” websites where users are tricked into divulging personal
information which can be used to access and illegally transfer money out of the
victim’s bank account(s), open new bank or credit card accounts in the victim’s
name, make unlawful online purchases, etc.

These attacks are continually becoming more sophisticated. The past year has
seen the growth of a new practice known as spear-phishing where accurate
information about the recipient, such as the full name and home address, is
included in the phishing e-mail making it even more convincing. Another new
phenomenon known as vishing tricks people into making phone calls rather
than clicking on links to websites. The number given is to a VoIP phone which
records digits (such as account numbers) entered into the telephone, again
enabling crooks to steal and use the information.

Other variants of fraud rely on the use of identity stolen through technological
methods. For example, pharming interferes with the domain name system
(DNS) look up process and redirects users attempting to reach a particular
website to a “spoofed” one where they divulge personal information to the
crooks. Malware (or malicious software), can be downloaded unwittingly by
consumers from spam attachments or as they surf on line. Such malicious
code, which increasingly targets mobile phones and other portable devices in
                                                                               74
addition to computers, can install “key stroke” loggers and other programs to
steal information stored on, entered into, or received by these devices. The
information collected through these kinds of technological attacks, such as
passwords and other sensitive data, can then be used to perpetrate fraud.

   7.4.      Cyber frauds in India

According to Norton Cybercrime Report 2012, 66% of Indian online adults have
been a victim of cyber fraud in their lifetime. In the past 12 months, 56% of
online adults in India have experienced cyber fraud.

As per the report, at least 1,15,000 people fall prey to cyber fraud every day,
while 80 per minute and more than one per second leading to a rise in the
average direct financial cost per victim to around Rs10,500.

According to the survey, the cybercriminals have now shifted their focus to the
increasingly popular social platforms. One in three adults online Indians (32%)
have been either social or mobile cybercrime victims.

While most internet users delete suspicious emails and are careful with their
personal details online. However, 25% don’t use complex passwords or change
their passwords frequently and 38% do not check for the padlock symbol in the
browser before entering sensitive personal information.

Online adults are also unaware of the evolution of most common forms of
cybercrime. In fact, 68% of adults do not know that malware can operate in a
discreet fashion, making it hard to know if a computer has been compromised,
and one third (35%) are not certain that their computer is currently clean and
free of viruses.




                                                                             75




                                                                     www.taxguru.in
   7.5.      Preventive measures

The first line of defence to prevent online consumers from becoming online
victims is good education. Tips on the major forms of Internet fraud and how to
combat them have been developed by public authorities, enforcement agencies,
and the private sector on various platforms such as government websites,
brochures, posters, videos, reports, etc. The International Consumer Protection
and Enforcement Network (ICPEN), an informal network of enforcement
authorities from OECD and other countries, has launched Fraud Prevention
Month, an awareness campaign taking place on a designated month every year.

The private sector also offers a number of technical tools to provide consumers
with real-time protection against cyber fraud. For example, business has
developed means to counter spam messages, which are a significant source of
fraud, through authentication, filters, and listings. Likewise, anti-phishing
systems have been put in place allowing Internet users to report phishing sites
and block them.

Preventive measures to be taken by corporates to protect their businesses –

      Setup an e-security program for your business.
      Ensure your security program facilitates confidentiality, integrity and
       availability.
      Identify the sources of threats to your data from both internal and
       external sources. Examples: disgruntled employees - leaving bugs behind
       in your system, hackers looking to steal confidential information.
      The security program that you create for your business must have
       provisions to maintenance and upgrades of your systems.
      Administrators have access to all files and data. Therefore, one must be
       mindful of who is guarding the guards.



                                                                              76
   Roles for security should be defined, documented, and implemented for
    both your company and external contractors.
   Establish a security awareness program for all users. Content should be
    communicated in non-technical terms. This could include briefings,
    posters, clauses in employee contracts, security awareness days etc.
   Implement security training for technical staff that is focused on the
    security controls for their particular technical areas.
   Maintain logs of all possible activities that may occur on your system.
    System records must note who was using the system, when, for how
    long, deletions etc.
   User accounts should not be shared. User authorization should be
    mandatory. Employees should only be able to see information that they
    are authorized to see.
   Employee user accounts must be disabled or removed when no longer
    needed. Example: in case an employee leaves the company.
   Ensure network security from external sources by installing firewalls and
    intrusion detection systems.
   Allow remote access to employees only through secure communication
    channels like SSL or VPN.
   Install antivirus software on all desktops and servers. Buy Anti-Virus
    software solutions that allow real time upgrading of systems with anti-
    virus patches.
   Create a data backup and disaster recovery plan in case of unforeseen
    natural calamities.
   Ensure back-up procedures are in place and tested.
   Ensure back-up procedures include all the critical as well as back office
    data such as finance, payroll etc.
   Incident response is the ability to identify, evaluate, raise and address
    negative computer related security events.
   In case of an incident, do not panic, and continue to save logs.
                                                                             77




                                                                       www.taxguru.in
      Incident response - Take a backup of the affected system and notify the
       authorities.

The draft National Cyber Security Policy of India has been prepared by CERT-
In. The policy is intended to cater to a broad spectrum of ICT users and
providers including Government and non-Government entities. Besides this
CERT-In in coordination with MHA, NIC and other stakeholders prepared and
circulated Computer security guidelines and procedures for implementation
across all Central Government Ministries/Departments.

   7.6.      Cyber crimes

Some types of cyber crimes found in India are:

   1. Cyber pornography
       This would include pornographic websites; pornographic magazines
       produced using computers (to publish and print the material) and the
       Internet (to download and transmit pornographic pictures, photos,
       writings etc). (Delhi Public School case)


   2. Sale of illegal articles:
       This would include sale of narcotics, weapons and wildlife etc., by
       posting information on websites, auction websites, and bulletin boards or
       simply by using email communication. E.g. many of the auction sites
       even in India are believed to be selling cocaine in the name of ‘honey’.


   3. Online gambling
       There are millions of websites; all hosted on servers abroad, that offer
       online gambling. In fact, it is believed that many of these websites are
       actually fronts for money laundering. Cases of hawala transactions and
       money laundering over the Internet have been reported. Whether these

                                                                                  78
  sites have any relationship with drug trafficking is yet to be explored.
  Recent Indian case about cyber lotto was very interesting. A man called
  Kola Mohan invented the story of winning the Euro Lottery. He himself
  created a website and an email address on the Internet with the address
  'eurolottery@usa.net.' Whenever accessed, the site would name him as
  the beneficiary of the 12.5 million pound. After confirmation a Telugu
  newspaper published this as a news. He collected huge sums from the
  public as well as from some banks for mobilization of the deposits in
  foreign currency. However, the fraud came to light when a cheque
  discounted by him with the Andhra Bank for Rs 1.73 million bounced.
  Mohan had pledged with Andhra Bank the copy of a bond certificate
  purportedly issued by Midland Bank, Sheffields, London stating that a
  term deposit of 12.5 million was held in his name.


4. Intellectual Property crimes
  These include software piracy, copyright infringement, trademarks
  violations, theft of computer source code etc. In other words this is also
  referred to as cyber squatting. Satyam Vs. Siffy is the most widely known
  case. Bharti Cellular Ltd. filed a case in the Delhi High Court that some
  cyber squatters had registered domain names such as barticellular.com
  and bhartimobile.com with Network solutions under different fictitious
  names. The court directed Network Solutions not to transfer the domain
  names in question to any third party and the matter is sub-judice.
  Similar issues had risen before various High Courts earlier. Yahoo had
  sued one Akash Arora for use of the domain name ‘Yahooindia.Com’
  deceptively similar to its ‘Yahoo.com’. As this case was governed by the
  Trade Marks Act, 1958, the additional defence taken against Yahoo’s
  legal action for the interim order was that the Trade Marks Act was
  applicable only to goods.


                                                                          79




                                                                  www.taxguru.in
5. Email spoofing
  A spoofed email is one that appears to originate from one source but
  actually has been sent from another source. E.g. Gauri has an e-mail
  address gauri@indiaforensic.com. Her enemy, Prasad spoofs her e-mail
  and sends obscene messages to all her acquaintances. Since the e-mails
  appear to have originated from Gauri, her friends could take offence and
  relationships could be spoiled for life.
  Email spoofing can also cause monetary damage. In an American case, a
  teenager made millions of dollars by spreading false information about
  certain companies whose shares he had short sold. This misinformation
  was spread by sending spoofed emails, purportedly from news agencies
  like Reuters, to share brokers and investors who were informed that the
  companies were doing very badly. Even after the truth came out the
  values of the shares did not go back to the earlier levels and thousands
  of investors lost a lot of money.
  Recently, a branch of the Global Trust Bank experienced a run on the
  bank. Numerous customers decided to withdraw all their money and
  close their accounts. It was revealed that someone had sent out spoofed
  emails to many of the bank’s customers stating that the bank was in very
  bad shape financially and could close operations at any time.
  Unfortunately this information proved to be true in the next few days.
  But the best example of the email spoofing can be given by an
  Executive’s case, where he pretended to be a girl and cheated an Abu
  dhabi based NRI for crores by blackmailing tactics.


6. Forgery
  Counterfeit currency notes, postage and revenue stamps, mark sheets
  etc can be forged using sophisticated computers, printers and scanners.
  Outside many colleges across India, one finds touts soliciting the sale of
  fake mark sheets or even certificates. These are made using computers,
                                                                           80
  and high quality scanners and printers. In fact, this has becoming a
  booming business involving thousands of Rupees being given to student
  gangs in exchange for these bogus but authentic looking certificates.
  Some of the students are caught but this is very rare phenomenon.


7. Cyber Defamation:
  This occurs when defamation takes place with the help of computers and
  / or the Internet. E.g. someone publishes defamatory matter about
  someone     on    a   website   or   sends   e-mails   containing   defamatory
  information to all of that person’s friends.
  India’s first case of cyber defamation was reported when a company’s
  employee started sending derogatory, defamatory and obscene e-mails
  about its Managing Director. The e-mails were anonymous and frequent,
  and were sent to many of their business associates to tarnish the image
  and goodwill of the company.
  The company was able to identify the employee with the help of a private
  computer expert and moved the Delhi High Court. The court granted an
  ad-interim injunction and restrained the employee from sending,
  publishing and transmitting e-mails, which are defamatory or derogatory
  to the plaintiffs.


8. Cyber stalking
  The Oxford dictionary defines stalking as “pursuing stealthily”. Cyber
  stalking involves following a person’s movements across the Internet by
  posting messages (sometimes threatening) on the bulletin boards
  frequented by the victim, entering the chat-rooms frequented by the
  victim, constantly bombarding the victim with emails etc.




                                                                              81




                                                                       www.taxguru.in
   9. Unauthorized access to computer systems or networks
      This activity is commonly referred to as hacking. The Indian law has,
      however, given a different connotation to the term hacking, so we will not
      use the term “unauthorized access” interchangeably with the term
      “hacking”. However, as per Indian law, unauthorized access does occur,
      if hacking has taken place. An active hackers’ group, led by one “Dr.
      Nuker”, who claims to be the founder of Pakistan Hackerz Club,
      reportedly hacked the websites of the Indian Parliament, Ahmedabad
      Telephone Exchange, Engineering Export Promotion Council, and United
      Nations (India).


   10.      Theft of information contained in electronic form
      This includes information stored in computer hard disks, removable
storage media etc.


   11.      Email bombing
      Email bombing refers to sending a large number of emails to the victim
      resulting in the victim’s email account (in case of an individual) or mail
      servers (in case of a company or an email service provider) crashing. In
      one case, a foreigner who had been residing in Simla, India for almost
      thirty years wanted to avail of a scheme introduced by the Simla Housing
      Board to buy land at lower rates. When he made an application it was
      rejected on the grounds that the scheme was available only for citizens of
      India. He decided to take his revenge. Consequently he sent thousands of
      mails to the Simla Housing Board and repeatedly kept sending e-mails
      till their servers crashed.


   12.      Data diddling
      This kind of an attack involves altering raw data just before it is
      processed by a computer and then changing it back after the processing
                                                                              82
  is completed. Electricity Boards in India have been victims to data
  diddling programs inserted when private parties were computerizing their
  systems. The NDMC Electricity Billing Fraud Case that took place in
  1996 is a typical example. The computer network was used for receipt
  and accounting of electricity bills by the NDMC, Delhi. Collection of
  money, computerized accounting, record maintenance and remittance in
  his bank were exclusively left to a private contractor who was a computer
  professional. He misappropriated huge amount of funds by manipulating
  data files to show less receipt and bank remittance.


13.     Salami attacks
  These attacks are used for the commission of financial crimes. The key
  here is to make the alteration so insignificant that in a single case it
  would go completely unnoticed. E.g. a bank employee inserts a program,
  into the bank’s servers, that deducts a small amount of money (say Rs. 5
  a month) from the account of every customer. No account holder will
  probably notice this unauthorized debit, but the bank employee will
  make a sizeable amount of money every month.
  To cite an example, an employee of a bank in USA was dismissed from
  his job. Disgruntled at having been supposedly mistreated by his
  employers the man first introduced a logic bomb into the bank’s systems.
  Logic bombs are programmes, which get activated on the occurrence of a
  particular predefined event. The logic bomb was programmed to take ten
  cents from all the accounts in the bank and put them into the account of
  the person whose name was alphabetically the last in the bank’s rosters.
  Then he went and opened an account in the name of Ziegler. The amount
  being withdrawn from each of the accounts in the bank was so
  insignificant that neither any of the account holders nor the bank
  officials noticed the fault.


                                                                         83




                                                                 www.taxguru.in
  It was brought to their notice when a person by the name of Zygler
  opened his account in that bank. He was surprised to find a sizeable
  amount of money being transferred into his account every Saturday.
  Being an honest person, he reported the “mistake” to the bank
  authorities and the entire scheme was revealed.


14.     Denial of Service attack
  This involves flooding a computer resource with more requests than it
  can handle. This causes the resource (e.g. a web server) to crash thereby
  denying authorized users the service offered by the resource. Another
  variation to a typical denial of service attack is known as a Distributed
  Denial of Service (DDoS) attack wherein the perpetrators are many and
  are geographically widespread.
  It is very difficult to control such attacks. The attack is initiated by
  sending excessive demands to the victim’s computer(s), exceeding the
  limit that the victim’s servers can support and making the servers crash.
  Denial-of-service attacks have had an impressive history having, in the
  past, brought down websites like Amazon, CNN, Yahoo and eBay!


15.     Virus / worm attacks
  Viruses are programs that attach themselves to a computer or a file and
  then circulate themselves to other files and to other computers on a
  network. They usually affect the data on a computer, either by altering or
  deleting it. Worms, unlike viruses do not need the host to attach
  themselves to. They merely make functional copies of themselves and do
  this repeatedly till they eat up all the available space on a computer’s
  memory.
  The VBS_LOVELETTER virus (better known as the Love Bug or the
  ILOVEYOU virus) was reportedly written by a Filipino undergraduate. In
  May 2000, this deadly virus became the world’s most prevalent virus. It
                                                                          84
  struck one in every five personal computers in the world. When the virus
  was brought under check the true magnitude of the losses was
  incomprehensible. Losses incurred during this virus attack were pegged
  at US $ 10 billion. VBS_LOVELETTER utilized the addresses in Microsoft
  Outlook and e-mailed itself to those addresses. The e-mail which was
  sent out had "ILOVEYOU" in its subject line. The attachment file was
  named "LOVE-LETTER-FOR-YOU.TXT.vbs". People wary of opening e-
  mail attachments were conquered by the subject line and those who had
  some knowledge of viruses, did not notice the tiny .vbs extension and
  believed the file to be a text file. The message in the e-mail was "kindly
  check the attached LOVELETTER coming from me".
  Probably the world’s most famous worm was the Internet worm let loose
  on the Internet by Robert Morris sometime in 1988. The Internet was,
  then, still in its developing years and this worm, which affected
  thousands of computers, almost brought its development to a complete
  halt. It took a team of experts almost three days to get rid of the worm
  and in the meantime many of the computers had to be disconnected from
  the network.


16.     Logic bombs
  These are event dependent programs. This implies that these programs
  are created to do something only when a certain event (known as a
  trigger event) occurs. E.g. even some viruses may be termed logic bombs
  because they lie dormant all through the year and become active only on
  a particular date (like the Chernobyl virus).


17.     Trojan attacks
  A Trojan as this program is aptly called is an unauthorized program
  which functions from inside what seems to be an authorized program,
  thereby concealing what it is actually doing.
                                                                          85




                                                                  www.taxguru.in
  There are many simple ways of installing a Trojan in someone’s
  computer. To cite an example, two friends Rahul and Mukesh (names
  changed), had a heated argument over one girl, Radha (name changed)
  whom they both liked. When the girl, asked to choose, chose Mukesh
  over Rahul, Rahul decided to get even. On the 14th of February, he sent
  Mukesh a spoofed e-card, which appeared to have come from Radha’s
  mail account. The e-card actually contained a Trojan. As soon as Mukesh
  opened the card, the Trojan was installed on his computer. Rahul now
  had complete control over Mukesh’s computer and proceeded to harass
  him thoroughly.


18.     Internet time theft
  This connotes the usage by an unauthorized person of the Internet hours
  paid for by another person. In May 2000, the economic offences wing,
  IPR section crime branch of Delhi police registered its first case involving
  theft of Internet hours. In this case, the accused, Mukesh Gupta an
  engineer with Nicom System (p) Ltd. was sent to the residence of the
  complainant to activate his Internet connection. However, the accused
  used Col. Bajwa’s login name and password from various places causing
  wrongful loss of 100 hours to Col. Bajwa. Delhi police arrested the
  accused for theft of Internet time. On further inquiry in the case, it was
  found that Krishan Kumar, son of an ex army officer, working as senior
  executive in M/s Highpoint Tours & Travels had used Col Bajwa’s login
  and passwords as many as 207 times from his residence and twice from
  his office. He confessed that Shashi Nagpal, from whom he had
  purchased a computer, gave the login and password to him. The police
  could not believe that time could be stolen. They were not aware of the
  concept of time-theft at all. Colonel Bajwa’s report was rejected. He
  decided to approach The Times of India, New Delhi. They, in turn carried
  a report about the inadequacy of the New Delhi Police in handling cyber
                                                                            86
  crimes. The Commissioner of Police, Delhi then took the case into his
  own hands and the police under his directions raided and arrested
  Krishan Kumar under sections 379, 411, 34 of IPC and section 25 of the
  Indian Telegraph Act. In another case, the Economic Offences Wing of
  Delhi Police arrested a computer engineer who got hold of the password
  of an Internet user, accessed the computer and stole 107 hours of
  Internet time from the other person’s account. He was booked for the
  crime by a Delhi court during May 2000.


19.     Web jacking
  This occurs when someone forcefully takes control of a website (by
  cracking the password and later changing it). The actual owner of the
  website does not have any more control over what appears on that
  website. In a recent incident reported in the USA the owner of a hobby
  website for children received an e-mail informing her that a group of
  hackers had gained control over her website. They demanded a ransom
  of 1 million dollars from her. The owner, a schoolteacher, did not take
  the threat seriously. She felt that it was just a scare tactic and ignored
  the e-mail.
  It was three days later that she came to know, following many telephone
  calls from all over the country, that the hackers had web jacked her
  website. Subsequently, they had altered a portion of the website which
  was entitled ‘How to have fun with goldfish’. In all the places where it
  had been mentioned, they had replaced the word ‘goldfish’ with the word
  ‘piranhas’. Piranhas are tiny but extremely dangerous flesh-eating fish.
  Many children had visited the popular website and had believed what the
  contents of the website suggested. These unfortunate children followed
  the instructions, tried to play with piranhas, which they bought from pet
  shops, and were very seriously injured!


                                                                          87




                                                                  www.taxguru.in
       20.     Theft of computer system
         This type of offence involves the theft of a computer, some part(s) of a
         computer or a peripheral attached to the computer.


       21.     Physically damaging a computer system
         This crime is committed by physically damaging a computer or its
         peripherals.
This is just a list of the known crimes in the cyber world. The unknown crimes
might be far ahead of these, since the lawbreakers are always one-step ahead
of lawmakers.


       7.7.    Who commits cyber crimes?


 i.      Insiders - Disgruntled employees and ex-employees, spouses, lovers
 ii.     Hackers - Crack into networks with malicious intent
iii.     Virus Writers - Pose serious threats to networks and systems worldwide
iv.      Foreign Intelligence - Use cyber tools as part of their Services for
         espionage activities and can pose the biggest threat to the security of
         another country
 v.      Terrorists - Use to formulate plans, to raise funds, propaganda


       7.8.    Penalties and offences under the IT Act, 2000


The Indian Law has not given any definition to the term ‘cyber crime or cyber
frauds'. In fact, the Indian Penal Code does not use the term ‘cyber crime' at
any point even after its amendment by the Information Technology Act 2000.
Chapter XI of the Information Technology Act, 2000 deals with offences/crimes
related to cyber space.




                                                                               88
Offence                                             Section under IT Act,
                                                    2000

Tampering          with      Computer        source Sec.65
documents
Hacking with Computer systems, Data Sec.66
alteration
Sending      offensive messages          through Sec.66A
communication service, etc
Retains any stolen computer resource Sec.66B
or communication device
Fraudulent use of electronic signature              Sec.66C

Cheats by personating                               Sec.66D
Publishing obscene images                           Sec.66E
Cyber terrorism                                     Sec.66F
Publishes          or    transmits     unwanted Sec.67
material
Publishes or transmits sexually explicit Sec.67A
material
Abusing children online                             Sec.67B
Preservation            of    information       by Sec.67C
intermediary
Breach of Confidentiality and Privacy               Sec.72

Disclosure of information in breach of Sec.72A
contract
Publishing          false    digital    signature Sec.73 & 74
certificates


Sec.66A        -    Punishment         for    sending   offensive   messages   through
communication service, etc.
                                                                                     89




                                                                               www.taxguru.in
Any person who sends, by means of a computer resource or a communication
device,—

(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has menacing character; or

(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of causing
annoyance,   inconvenience,   danger,   obstruction,   insult,   injury,   criminal
intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will, persistently by making use of such
computer resource or a communication device,

(c) any electronic mail or electronic mail message for the purpose of causing
annoyance or inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or
recipient about the origin of such messages, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine.

Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, terms “electronic mail” and
“electronic mail message” means a message or information created or
transmitted or received on a computer, computer system, computer resource or
communication device including attachments in text, images, audio, video and
any other electronic record, which may be transmitted with the message.

Sec.66B - Whoever dishonestly received or retains any stolen computer
resource or communication device knowing or having reason to believe the
same to be stolen computer resource or communication device, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years or with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh or with both.

Sec.66C - Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly make use of the electronic
signature, password or any other unique identification feature of any other
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine with may
extend to rupees one lakh.


                                                                                 90
Sec.66D - Whoever, by means for any communication device or computer
resource cheats by personating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable
to fine which may extend to one lakh rupee.

Sec.66E - Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes or
transmits the image of a private area of any person without his or her consent,
under circumstances violating the privacy of that person, shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine not exceeding
two lakh rupees, or with both.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section—

(a) “transmit” means to electronically send a visual image with the intent that it
be viewed by a person or persons;

(b) “capture”, with respect to an image, means to videotape, photograph, film or
record by any means;

(c) “private area” means the naked or undergarment clad genitals, public area,
buttocks or female breast:

(d) “publishes” means reproduction in the printed or electronic form and
making it available for public;

(e) “under circumstances violating privacy” means circumstances in which a
person can have a reasonable expectation that—

(i) he or she could disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that an image of
his private area was being captured; or

(ii) any part of his or her private area would not be visible to the public,
regardless of whether that person is in a public or private place.



                                                                                91




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
Sec.66F - (1) Whoever,— (A) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity,
security or sovereignty of India or to strike terror in the people or any section of
the people by— (i) denying or cause the denial of access to any person
authorized to access computer resource; or (ii) attempting to penetrate or
access a computer resource without authorisation or exceeding authorised
access; or (iii) introducing or causing to introduce any computer contaminant;
and by means of such conduct causes or is likely to cause death or injuries to
persons or damage to or destruction of property or disrupts or knowing that it
is likely to cause damage or disruption of supplies or services essential to the
life of the community or adversely affect the critical information infrastructure
specified under section 70, or (B) knowingly or intentionally penetrates or
accesses a computer resource without authorisation or exceeding authorised
access, and by means of such conduct obtains access to information, data or
computer database that is restricted for reasons for the security of the State or
foreign relations, or any restricted information, data or computer database,
with reasons to believe that such information, data or computer database so
obtained may be used to cause or likely to cause injury to the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations
with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to
contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence, or to the advantage
of any foreign nation, group of individuals or otherwise, commits the offence of
cyber terrorism.

(2) Whoever commits or conspires to commit cyber terrorism shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to imprisonment for life.

Sec.67 - Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or
transmitted in the electronic form, any material which is lascivious or appeals
to the prurient interest or if its effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt
persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see
or hear the matter contained or embodied in it, shall be punished on first
                                                                                  92
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and
in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine which
may extend to ten lakh rupees.

Sec.67A - Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or
transmitted in the electronic form any material which contains sexually explicit
act or conduct shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years and with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.

Sec.67B - Whoever,— (a) publishes or transmits or causes to be published or
transmitted material in any electronic form which depicts children engaged in
sexually explicit act or conduct; or (b) creates text or digital images, collects,
seeks, browses, downloads, advertises, promotes, exchanges or distributes
material in any electronic form depicting children in obscene or indecent or
sexually explicit manner; or (c) cultivates, entices or induces children to online
relationship with one or more children for and on sexually explicit act or in a
manner that may offend a reasonable adult on the computer resource; or (d)
facilitates abusing children online, or (e) records in any electronic form own
abuse or that of others pertaining to sexually explicit act with children, shall be
punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh
rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and also with
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees:




                                                                                 93




                                                                         www.taxguru.in
Provided that provisions of section 67, section 67A and this section does not
extend to any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representation
or figure in electronic form—

(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good
on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing drawing, painting
representation or figure is the interest of science, literature, art or learning or
other objects of general concern; or (ii) which is kept or used for bonafide
heritage or religious purposes.

Explanation- For the purposes of this section “children” means a persons who
has not completed the age of 18 years.

Sec.67C - (1) Intermediary shall preserve and retain such information as may
be specified for such duration and in such manner and format as the Central
Government may prescribe. (2) Any intermediary who intentionally or
knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punished with
an imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also be liable
to fine.



   7.9.     Offences under other legislations


Offence                                  Law

Sending    threatening   messages    by Sec.503 IPC (Indian Penal
email                                    Code)
Sending    defamatory    messages    by Sec 499 IPC
email
Forgery of electronic records            Sec.463 IPC

Bogus websites, cyber frauds             Sec.420 IPC


                                                                                 94
Email spoofing                          Sec.463 IPC

Web-Jacking                             Sec.383 IPC

E-Mail Abuse                            Sec.500 IPC

Online sale of Drugs                    Narcotic       Drugs     and
                                        Psychotropic
                                        Substances (NDPS)        Act,
                                        1985

Online sale of Arms                     Arms Act, 1959


   7.10.    Investigation of cyber crimes in India


In keeping with the demand of the times, the Cyber Crime Investigation Cell
(CCIC) of the CBI, notified in September 1999, started functioning with effect
from 3.3.2000. The Cell is headed by a Superintendent of Police. The
jurisdiction of this Cell is all India, and besides the offences punishable under
Chapter XI, IT Act, 2000, it also has power to look into other high-tech crimes.

Cyber Crime Investigation Cell is a wing of Mumbai Police, India, to deal with
Cyber crimes, and to enforce provisions of the Information Technology Act
2000, and various cyber crime related provisions of criminal laws, including
the Indian Penal Code. Cyber Crime Investigation Cell is a part of Crime
Branch, Criminal Investigation Department of the Mumbai Police. The Cyber
Crime Investigation Cell of Mumbai Police was inaugurated on 18th December
2000 and it is functioning under the overall guidance of Jt. Commissioner of
Police (Crime), Addl. Commissioner of Police (Crime) and Dy. Commissioner of
Police (Enforcement).

Cyber Crime Cells are also there at Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad,
Thane, Pune, Gujarat and Gurgaon.

                                                                               95




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
The following information should be submitted while lodging a complaint -

  1)    Victim of hacking
           o   Server Logs;
           o   Copy of defaced web page in soft copy as well as hard copy format,
               if website is defaced;
           o   If data is compromised on your server or computer or any other
               network equipment, soft copy of original data and soft copy of
               compromised data.
           o   Access control mechanism details i.e.- who had what kind of
               access to the compromised system;
           o   List of suspects – if the victim is having any suspicion on anyone.
           o   All relevant information leading to answers to the following
               questions –
                              what ? (what is compromised)
                              who? (who might have compromised system)
                              when? (when the system was compromised)
                              why? (why the system might have been compromised)
                              where? (where is the impact of attack-identifying the
                                target system from the network)
                              How   many?    (How    many    systems   have     been
                                compromised by the attack)
       2) Victim   of e-mail abuse, vulgar e-mail etc.
           o   Extract the extended headers of offending e-mail.
           o   Bring soft copy as well hard copy of offending e-mail.
           o   Please do not delete the offending e-mail from your e-mail box.
           o   Please save the copy of offending e-mail on your computer’s hard
               drive.




                                                                                     96
   8. REGULATORY AUTHORITIES


   1) Department of Electronics and Information Technology


The functions of the Department of Electronics and Information Technology,
Ministry of Communications & Information Technology, Government of India
are as follows –
      Policy matters relating to Information Technology, Electronics and
       Internet.
      Initiatives for development of Hardware / Software industry including
       knowledge based enterprises, measures for promoting Information
       Technology exports and competitiveness of the industry.
      Promotion of Information Technology and Information Technology
       enabled services and Internet.
      Assistance to other departments in the promotion of E-Governance, E-
       Infrastructure, E-Medicine, E-Commerce, etc.
      Promotion   of   Information     Technology   education   and   Information
       Technology-based education.
      Matters relating to Cyber Laws, administration of the Information
       Technology Act. 2000 (21 of 2000) and other Information Technology
       related laws.
      Matters relating to promotion and manufacturing of Semiconductor
       Devices in the country.
      Interaction in Information Technology related matters with International
       agencies and bodies.
      Initiative on bridging the Digital Divide, Matters relating to Media Lab
       Asia.




                                                                                97




                                                                         www.taxguru.in
      Promotion of Standardization, Testing and Quality in Information
       Technology and standardization of procedure for Information Technology
       application and Tasks.
      Electronics Export and Computer Software Promotion Council (ESC).
      National Informatics Centre (NIC)
      All matters relating to personnel under the control of the Department.


   2) Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA)

The IT Act provides for the Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA) to license
and regulate the working of Certifying Authorities. The Certifying Authorities
(CAs) issue digital signature certificates for electronic authentication of users.
The CCA certifies the public keys of CAs using its own private key, which
enables users in the cyberspace to verify that a given certificate is issued by a
licensed CA. For this purpose it operates, the Root Certifying Authority of India
(RCAI).



   3) Cyber Appellate Tribunal


Cyber Appellate Tribunal has been established under the IT Act under the aegis
of Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA). A Cyber Appellate Tribunal
consists of one Presiding Officer who is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court
or is or has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and is holding or has
held a post in Grade I of that service for at least three years supported by other
official under him/her.

The Cyber Appellate Tribunal has, for the purposes of discharging its functions
under the IT Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908. However, is not bound by the procedure laid down by
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but is guided by the principles of natural
                                                                                98
justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules. The
Cyber Appellate Tribunal has powers to regulate its own procedure including
the place at which it has its sittings.

Every proceeding before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the
purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

The composition of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal is provided for under section
49 of the Information Technology Act, 2000. Initially the Tribunal consisted of
only one person who was referred to as the Presiding Officer who was to be
appointed by way of notification by the Central Government. Thereafter the Act
was amended in the year 2008 by which section 49 which provides for the
composition of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal has been changed. As per the
amended section the Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and such number
of other Members as the Central Government may by notification in the Official
Gazette appoint. The selection of the Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal
is made by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of
India. The Presiding Officer of the Tribunal is now known as the Chairperson.



   4) Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (ICERT)
The mission of ICERT is to enhance the security of India's Communications
and   Information    Infrastructure   through   proactive   action   and    effective
collaboration. Its constituency is the Indian Cyber-community.

The purpose of the ICERT is, to become the nation's most trusted referral
agency of the Indian Community for responding to computer security incidents
as and when they occur; the ICERT will also assist members of the Indian
Community in implementing proactive measures to reduce the risks of
                                                                                  99




                                                                           www.taxguru.in
computer    security   incidents.   It   provides   technical   advice   to   system
administrators and users to respond to computer security incidents. It also
identifies trends in intruder activity, works with other similar institutions and
organisations to resolve major security issues and disseminates information to
the Indian cyber community.

It functions under the Department of Information Technology, Ministry of
Communications & Information Technology, Government of India.




                                                                                 100
   9. CLOUD COMPUTING


Cloud computing is internet based computing where virtual shared servers
provide software, infrastructure, platform, devices and other resources and
hosting to customers on a pay-as-you—use basis. All information that a
digitized system has to offer is provided as a service in the cloud computing
model. Users can access these services available on the “internet cloud”
without having any previous know-how on managing the resources involved.
Thus, users can concentrate more on their core business processes rather than
spending time and gaining knowledge on resources needed to manage their
business processes.


Cloud computing customers do not own the physical infrastructure; rather
they rent the usage from a third-party provider. This helps them to avoid huge
expenses. They consume resources as a service and pay only for resources that
they use. Most cloud computing infrastructures consist of services delivered
through common centres and built on servers.


There are different types of clouds that one can subscribe depending on their
needs –
   1. Public Cloud - A public cloud can be accessed by any subscriber with an
      internet connection and access to the cloud space.
   2. Private Cloud - A private cloud is established for a specific group or
      organization and limits access to just that group.
   3. Community Cloud - A community cloud is shared among two or more
      organizations that have similar cloud requirements.
   4. Hybrid Cloud - A hybrid cloud is essentially a combination of at least two
      clouds, where the clouds included are a mixture of public, private, or
      community.
                                                                             101




                                                                      www.taxguru.in
The benefits of cloud computing for an enterprise include –
    Reduction in upfront capital expenditure on hardware and software
      development. Consumption is usually billed on a utility (like phone bills)
      or subscription (like magazines) model. Users can terminate the contract
      at any time and are often covered by Service Level Agreements with
      financial penalties. This reduces risk and uncertainty and ensures them
      return on investment.
    Location independence, as long as there is access to the internet.
    Allows the enterprise to focus on its core business.
    Increased competitive advantage.
    Increased security at a much lesser cost as compared to traditional
      applications due to centralization of data and increased security focused
      resources.
    Easy to maintain as they don’t have to be installed on each user’s
      computer.




                                                                             102
   10.        CASE LAWS


   i) State of Tamil Nadu Vs Suhas Katti
The Case of Suhas Katti is notable for the fact that the conviction was achieved
successfully within a relatively quick time of 7 months from the filing of the
FIR. Considering that similar cases have been pending in other states for a
much longer time, the efficient handling of the case which happened to be the
first case of the Chennai Cyber Crime Cell going to trial deserves a special
mention.
The case related to posting of obscene, defamatory and annoying message
about a divorcee woman in the yahoo message group. E-Mails were also
forwarded to the victim for information by the accused through a false e-mail
account opened by him in the name of the victim. The posting of the message
resulted in annoying phone calls to the lady in the belief that she was
soliciting.
Based on a complaint made by the victim in February 2004, the Police traced
the accused to Mumbai and arrested him within the next few days. The
accused was a known family friend of the victim and was reportedly interested
in marrying her. She however married another person. This marriage later
ended in divorce and the accused started contacting her once again. On her
reluctance to marry him, the accused took up the harassment through the
Internet.
On 24-3-2004 Charge Sheet was filed u/s 67 of IT Act 2000, 469 and 509 IPC
before The Hon’ble Addl. CMM Egmore by citing 18 witnesses and 34
documents     and   material   objects.   The   same   was   taken   on     file   in
C.C.NO.4680/2004. On the prosecution side 12 witnesses were examined and
entire documents were marked as Exhibits.
The Defence argued that the offending mails would have been given either by
ex-husband of the complainant or the complainant herself to implicate the
                                                                                   103




                                                                          www.taxguru.in
accused as accused alleged to have turned down the request of the
complainant to marry her. Further the Defence counsel argued that some of
the documentary evidence was not sustainable under Section 65B of the Indian
Evidence Act. However, the court relied upon the expert witnesses and other
evidence produced before it, including the witnesses of the Cyber Cafe owners
and came to the conclusion that the crime was conclusively proved.
Ld. Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Egmore, delivered the judgement
on 5-11-04 as follows: " The accused is found guilty of offences under section
469, 509 IPC and 67 of IT Act 2000 and the accused is convicted and is
sentenced for the offence to undergo RI for 2 years under 469 IPC and to pay
fine of Rs.500/-and for the offence u/s 509 IPC sentenced to undergo 1 year
Simple imprisonment and to pay fine of Rs.500/- and for the offence u/s 67 of
IT Act 2000 to undergo RI for 2 years and to pay fine of Rs.4000/- All
sentences to run concurrently."
This is considered as the first case convicted under Section 67 of Information
Technology Act 2000 in India.


   ii) Syed Asifuddin and Ors. V. The State of AP. & Anr., 2005CriLJ4314
Tata Indicom employees were arrested for manipulation of the electronic 32-bit
number (ESN) programmed into cell phones that were exclusively franchised to
Reliance Infocomm.
The court held that such manipulation amounted to tampering with computer
source code as envisaged by section 65 of the Information Technology Act,
2000.
Reliance Infocomm launched a scheme under which a cell phone subscriber
was given a digital handset worth Rs. 10,500/- as well as service bundle for 3
years with an initial payment of Rs. 3350/- and monthly outflow of Rs. 600/-.
The subscriber was also provided a 1 year warranty and 3 year insurance on
the handset. The condition was that the handset was technologically locked so
that it would only work with the Reliance Infocomm services. If the customer
                                                                           104
wanted to leave Reliance services, he would have to pay some charges
including the true price of the handset. Since the handset was of a high
quality, the market response to the scheme was phenomenal.
Unidentified persons contacted Reliance customers with an offer to change to a
lower priced Tata Indicom scheme. As part of the deal, their phone would be
technologically "unlocked" so that the exclusive Reliance handsets could be
used for the Tata Indicom service.
Reliance officials came to know about this "unlocking" by Tata employees and
lodged a First Information Report (FIR) under various provisions of the Indian
Penal Code, Information Technology Act and the Copyright Act. The police then
raided some offices of Tata Indicom in Andhra Pradesh and arrested a few Tata
Tele Services Limited officials for reprogramming the Reliance handsets. These
arrested persons approached the High Court requesting the court to quash the
FIR on the grounds that their acts did not violate the said legal provisions.
Some of the issues raised by the defence in the case were - It is always open for
the subscriber to change from one service provider to the other service
provider; The subscriber who wants to change from Tata Indicom always takes
his handset, to other service providers to get service connected and to give up
Tata services; The handsets brought to Tata by Reliance subscribers are
capable of accommodating two separate lines and can be activated on principal
assignment mobile ( NAM 1 or NAM 2). The mere activation of NAM 1 or NAM 2
by Tata in relation to a handset brought to it by a Reliance subscriber does not
amount to any crime; A telephone handset is neither a computer nor a
computer system containing a computer programmed; there is no law in force
which requires the maintenance of "computer source code". Hence section 65 of
the Information Technology Act does not apply.
Following were the observations of the Court –
      As per section 2 of the Information Technology Act, any electronic,
       magnetic or optical device used for storage of information received
       through satellite, microwave or other communication media and the
                                                                                105




                                                                        www.taxguru.in
       devices    which   are   programmable   and   capable   of   retrieving   any
       information by manipulations of electronic, magnetic or optical impulses
       is a computer which can be used as computer system in a computer
       network.
      The instructions or programmed given to computer in a language known
       to the computer are not seen by the users of the computer/consumers of
       computer functions. This is known as source code in computer parlance.
      ESN and SID come within the definition of "computer source code" under
       section 65 of the Information Technology Act.
      When ESN is altered, the offence under Section 65 of Information
       Technology Act is attracted because every service provider has to
       maintain its own SID code and also give a customer specific number to
       each instrument used to avail the services provided.


   iii) P.R. Transport Agency Vs. Union of India (UOI)
Bharat Coking Coal Ltd (BCC) held an e-auction for coal in different lots. P.R.
Transport Agency's (PRTA) bid was accepted for 4000 metric tons of coal from
Dobari Colliery. The acceptance letter was issued on 19th July 2005 by e-mail
to PRTA's e-mail address. Acting upon this acceptance, PRTA deposited the full
amount of Rs. 81.12 lakh through a cheque in favour of BCC. This cheque was
accepted and encashed by BCC. BCC did not deliver the coal to PRTA. Instead
it e-mailed PRTA saying that the sale as well as the e-auction in favour of PRTA
stood cancelled "due to some technical and unavoidable reasons". The only
reason for this cancellation was that there was some other person whose bid
for the same coal was slightly higher than that of PRTA. Due to some flaw in
the computer or it’s programmed or feeding of data the higher bid had not been
considered earlier. This communication was challenged by PRTA in the High
Court of Allahabad.
BCC objected to the "territorial jurisdiction" of the Court on the grounds that
no part of the cause of action had arisen within U.P. The communication of the
                                                                                 106
acceptance of the tender was received by the petitioner by e-mail at Chandauli
(U.P.). Hence the contract (from which the dispute arose) was completed at
Chandauli (U.P). The completion of the contract is a part of the "cause of
action'.   The   place   where    the   contract   was   completed   by   receipt    of
communication of acceptance is a place where 'part of cause of action' arises.
The Court observed –
      In reference to contracts made by telephone, telex or fax, the contract is
       complete when and where the acceptance is received. However, this
       principle can apply only where the transmitting terminal and the
       receiving terminal are at fixed points.
      In case of e-mail, the data (in this case acceptance) can be transmitted
       from anywhere by the e-mail account holder. It goes to the memory of a
       'server' which may be located anywhere and can be retrieved by the
       addressee account holder from anywhere in the world. Therefore, there is
       no fixed point either of transmission or of receipt.
      Section 13(3) of the Information Technology Act has covered this
       difficulty of "no fixed point either of transmission or of receipt". According
       to this section "...an electronic record is deemed to be received at the
       place where the addressee has his place of business."
      The acceptance of the tender will be deemed to be received by PRTA at
       the places where it has place of business. In this case it is Varanasi and
       Chandauli (both in U.P.)
      The acceptance was received by PRTA at Chandauli / Varanasi. The
       contract became complete by receipt of such acceptance.
      Both these places are within the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court
       of Allahabad. Therefore, a part of the cause of action has arisen in U.P.
       and the court has territorial jurisdiction.


   iv) SMC Pneumatics (India) Private Limited v. Jogesh Kwatra


                                                                                    107




                                                                           www.taxguru.in
A company’s employee started sending derogatory, defamatory and obscene
emails about company’s Managing Director. The emails were anonymous and
frequent and were sent to many company’s business associates to tarnish the
image and goodwill of the company. The accused was identified by the
company by the private computer expert.
Delhi High Court granted an injunction and restrained the employee from
sending, publishing and transmitting emails which are defamatory or
derogatory to the plaintiffs.


   v) Ritu Kohli case
One Mrs. Ritu Kohli complained to the police against the a person who was
using her identity to chat over the Internet at the website www.mirc.com,
mostly in the Delhi channel for four consecutive days. Mrs. Kohli further
complained that the person was chatting on the Net, using her name and
giving her address and was talking obscene language. The same person was
also deliberately giving her telephone number to other chatters encouraging
them to call Ritu Kohli at odd hours. Consequently, Mrs Kohli received almost
40 calls in three days mostly at odd hours from as far away as Kuwait, Cochin,
Bombay and Ahmedabad. The said calls created havoc in the personal life and
mental peace of Ritu Kohli who decided to report the matter.
The IP addresses were traced and the police investigated the entire matter and
ultimately arrested Manish Kathuria on the said complaint. Manish apparently
pleaded guilty and was arrested. A case was registered under section 509, of
the Indian Penal Code (IPC).


   vi) Avnish Bajaj Vs. State (N.C.T.) of Delhi
Avnish Bajaj – CEO of Baazee.com, a customer-to-customer website, which
facilitates the online sale of property. Baazee.com receives commission from
such sales and also generates revenue from advertisements carried on its web
pages. An obscene MMS clipping was listed for sale on Baazee.com on 27th
                                                                           108
November, 2004 in the name of “DPS Girl having fun”. Some copies of the
clipping were sold through Baazee.com and the seller received the money for
the sale. Avnish Bajaj was arrested under section 67 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000.
The arguments of the defendant were that - Section 67 of the Information
Technology Act relates to publication of obscene material. It does not relate to
transmission of such material. On coming to learn of the illegal character of the
sale, remedial steps were taken within 38 hours, since the intervening period
was a weekend.
The findings of the Court –
      It has not been established from the evidence that any publication took
       place by the accused, directly or indirectly.
      The actual obscene recording/clip could not be viewed on the portal of
       Baazee.com.
      The sale consideration was not routed through the accused.
      Prima facie Baazee.com had endeavored to plug the loophole.
      The accused had actively participated in the investigations.
      The nature of the alleged offence is such that the evidence has already
       crystallized and may even be tamper proof.
      Even though the accused is a foreign citizen, he is of Indian origin with
       family roots in India.
      The evidence that has been collected indicates only that the obscene
       material may have been unwittingly offered for sale on the website.
      The evidence that has been collected indicates that the heinous nature of
       the alleged crime may be attributable to some other person.
The court granted bail to Mr. Bajaj subject to furnishing two sureties of Rs. 1
lakh each. The court ordered Mr. Bajaj to surrender his passport and not to
leave India without the permission of the Court. The court also ordered Mr.
Bajaj to participate and assist in the investigation.

                                                                              109




                                                                       www.taxguru.in
   11.      IMPORTANT WEBSITES & ADDRESSES


http://deity.gov.in/ - Department of Electronics and Information Technology,
Govt. of India
http://cybercellmumbai.gov.in/ - Cyber crime investigation cell
http://ncrb.gov.in/ - National Crime Records Bureau
http://catindia.gov.in/Default.aspx - Cyber Appellate Tribunal
http://www.cert-in.org.in/ - Indian Computer Emergency Response Team
http://cca.gov.in/rw/pages/index.en.do - Controller of Certifying Authorities
www.safescrypt.com - Safescrypt
www.nic.in – National Informatics Centre
www.idrbtca.org.in - IDRBT
www.tcs-ca.tcs.co.in - TCS
www.mtnltrustline.com - MTNL
www.ncodesolutions.com - GNFC
www.e-Mudhra.com - e-Mudhra


Controller of Certifying Authorities
Electronics Niketan,
6 CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi – 110003
FAX : 91-011-24369578
info@cca.gov.in


Cyber Appellate Tribunal,
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,
Department of Information Technology,
Jeevan Bharti (L.I.C.) Building, Ground Floor,
Outer Circle, Connaught Place,
                                                                            110
New Delhi – 110001
Tel - 011-23355881


Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In)
Department of Information Technology,
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,
Government of India
Electronics Niketan,
6 CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi – 110003
Tel – 011-24368572




   =============================END===========================




                                                                 111




                                                         www.taxguru.in
